Statistics South Africa (Stats SA) reports that the country’s seasonally-adjusted gross domestic product (GDP) rose by 1.9% quarter-on-quarter in the first quarter of the year, driven primarily by the manufacturing sector, which increased by 4.9% and contributed 0.6 of a percentage point to the overall tally. On a year-on-year basis, unadjusted GDP was 3% higher. The size of the economy is now at pre-pandemic levels, with real GDP slightly higher than what it was before the Covid-19 pandemic, Statistics South Africa reported on June 7. Within manufacturing, petroleum, chemicals, rubber and plastic products were the largest contributors to increased production in the first quarter. Also, the food and beverage industry; basic iron and steel, nonferrous metal products, metal products and machinery division; and motor vehicles, parts and accessories and other transport equipment divisions also made significant contributions to overall GDP growth. After manufacturing, the trade, catering and accommodation industry was the second-highest contributor to lifting GDP, rising 3.1% in the period under review, and adding 0.4 of a percentage point overall. The finance, real estate and business services industry increased by 1.7%, also adding 0.4 of a percentage point overall. The construction industry experienced a decline of 0.7%, but did not decrease the overall GDP figure. However, mining production was 1.1% lower quarter-on-quarter, with platinum group metals, iron-ore and gold having had the greatest negative impact. In the fourth and third quarters of 2021, mining slid 3.2% and 1.1%, respectively, while the second and first quarters of 2021 experienced 2% and 4.1% growth, respectively. Other industries recording growth in the first quarter of this year include general government services, which was 1.4% higher; personal services, 1.1% higher; and agriculture, forestry and fisheries, which was 0.8% higher. Because of the decline in mining production, the primary sector (mining and agriculture) was dragged down 0.4%. The secondary sector – comprising manufacturing, electricity and construction – was 3.7% higher, buoyed by the rise in manufacturing and the electricity sector’s 2% increase. The tertiary sector – comprising trade, transport and finance – was 1.8% higher, buoyed by all three sectors and complemented by a 1.4% rise in government employment rates and a 1.1% rise in personal services. Stats SA reveals that nominal GDP in the first quarter was an estimated R1.59-trillion, with the biggest moving sectors being those of agriculture, which was R20-billion higher at R38-billion and the electricity sector, which was R2-billion higher at R43-billion. The biggest downward movers were the trade sector, down R12-billion to R187-billion, and mining, down R15-billion to R108-billion. Expenditure on GDP increased by 1.9% quarter-on-quarter and 2.6% year-on-year.