Aim- and ASX-listed Sovereign Metals has received recent analysis of the Kasiya rutile project's graphite co-product, one of the critical raw materials contained within the Kasiya deposit. Results show that natural graphite concentrate can be produced as a co-product from Kasiya. Benchmarking of characteristics of Kasiya's natural graphite demonstrates that it can be produced in line with the 2021 scoping study, with one of the lowest potential production costs globally; extremely low carbon footprint versus hard-rock operations or synthetic graphite production; and favourable flake size distribution suitable for a range of end-uses, including feedstock for the lithium-ion battery sector, the company highlights. “Not only is Kasiya the world's largest rutile deposit and one of the largest flake-graphite resources, but our latest graphite industry benchmarking also demonstrates the potential for Kasiya to be a globally dominant supplier and low-cost flake graphite producer at scale. Importantly, the very low graphite production costs at Kasiya should allow Sovereign to compete aggressively on price point across global graphite markets,” acclaims Sovereign MD Dr Julian Stephens. The graphite that is planned to be produced as a co-product from the Kasiya rutile operation is estimated to sit at the lowest end of the global flake graphite cost curve. Sovereign believes Kasiya has the potential for a dominant market position owing to the production scale of a coarse-flake, high-purity and highly crystalline product which should be suitable for lithium-ion batteries and wider traditional industrial uses. Kasiya's graphite flake size distribution compares favourably with that of industry peers, suggesting potential to achieve a high graphite basket price. An independent life cycle assessment study demonstrates that Kasiya's high-quality natural graphite concentrate should have a significantly lower carbon footprint than Chinese-produced natural graphite, the company points out. It notes that China currently produces over 75% of the world's natural graphite, almost 80% of the world's synthetic graphite and 100% of the world's natural graphite anodes used in lithium-ion batteries. The updated scoping study for Kasiya is on track and due for completion shortly.