London-listed Beowulf Mining on Monday announced Ulla Sandborgh as CEO of Jokkmokk Iron Mines; its subsidiary developing the Kallak iron-ore project in Sweden. The newly appointed CEO, who has strong connections in both the private and public sectors, said that the company was ready to move forward with the much-delayed Kallak project, having recently received the grant from government for the exploitation concession. Jokkmokk is focused on taking the next steps, securing all remaining permits and moving towards its goal to be in production in three to four years, Sandborgh stated. Beowulf noted that Sandborgh had extensive experience in managing permitting processes and, as part of this, engaging with stakeholders, ensuring interests were safeguarded and benefits shared. Her most recent role was that of director-general in the Enterprise, Infrastructure, Electricity and Water Ministry of Sweden. "With the award of the Concession for the Kallak project, Jokkmokk Iron is moving into the next phase and we see the strategic need for a CEO strongly connected with both the Swedish private and public sectors. Ulla's profile is an excellent fit.  She brings extensive experience from trade and industry in Sweden and deep knowledge of environmental permitting.  Ulla is a tremendous addition to the management team and will help Jokkmokk Iron make rapid progress. I am very excited to work with Ulla and for what we can achieve as a team," said Beowulf CEO Kurt Budge. The Kallak application has faced stiff opposition from environmental groups, who say the openpit mine will endanger the protected ecosystem and reindeer migration in the Gallok region. “For me, it’s important to strengthen the partnerships in the region for Jokkmokk Iron, and I am much looking forward to working together with the local and regional community as well as its leaders in the development of the region. It’s important with a strong local community and I believe that Jokkmokk Iron can be a key player in supporting the local community. “It is a big responsibility to create the most modern and sustainable mining operation at Kallak, but it is a responsibility that I am excited to have. I am focused on minimising Kallak’s impacts on the environment and maximising the positive benefits that flow from the project to the community in Jokkmokk. We can do this by developing a Net-Zero CO2 emissions operation, creating employment for local people, and building meaningful partnerships in the community," said Sandborgh. She has a degree in Civil Engineering from KTH Royal Institute of Technology and is an elected Member of the Royal Swedish Academy of Engineering Sciences.