During the 50 years that industrial equipment supplier AZ-Armaturen has been in existence, it has continuously developed its portfolio to meet the increasing demands of globally active customers. “The tradition of being a partner and meeting the highest demands of our customers is inextricably woven into the company’s fabric, and is what drives it forward, day-in and day-out,” the company says. Headquartered in Germany, the company manufactures sleeved, self-lubrication plug valves, special valves and allied products, which are used in various industries such as chemical, petrochemical, oil and gas, and mining. The company also has production plants in Brazil, China, the US and South Africa. Alongside the different production facilities, is a network of service centres around the world that holds stocks of the standard valves, drives and accessories. As a result, the company is in a position to make short-notice modifications to existing products, or even manufacture completely new configurations. As part of the company’s comprehensive customer care packages, valves can be reworked or repaired during equipment servicing. Special valves are a valuable resource and are reconditioned by AZ-Armaturen, depending on how much wear there is. Company director and CEO Jörg Wisser expounds in the company’s 50-Year Anniversary booklet that the company “develops valves for increasingly more demanding applications as specified by, for example, new and more efficient production processes with higher pressures and temperatures”. In his opening comments in the document, he says that solving of problems in plant engineering and the safeguarding of precise production processes are “fascinating areas to work in” and that they represent a challenge that the company is confronted with all the time. “Our valves are as versatile as the people who plan, design and produce these products,” he says in the booklet meant to give customers a look behind-the-scenes. South Africa Established in 1985, subsidiary AZ-Armaturen South Africa manufactures and distributes valves for the sub-Saharan African market, and also offers after-sales services such as refurbishments, technical consultancy, special designs, flow calculations, breakdown and 24-hour services. The company further offers high-quality valves and reliable services in order to reduce end-users’ cost to company. The International Organization for Standardisation (ISO) 9001 certified South African arm of the company “strives to be the top-quality manufacturer of valves in Africa, setting a standard second to none”, manufacturing locally in the country, though according to German design and international quality standards. AZ-Armaturen South Africa is also certified in accordance with the Broad-Based Black Economic Empower Act and boasts the status of an “empowering supplier”.