Aim-listed Caracal Gold says the results from its second batch of sample assay results from its reverse circulation (RC) and diamond drilling (DD) drilling programmes continue to confirm the strike and depth continuation of the known orebody at the Kilimapesa Hill deposit at the Kilimapesa Gold and Mining Operations, in Kenya, with strong gold grades, consistent with expectations. To date, 75 holes totalling 7 522 m of the planned 12 000 m RC drilling programme and eight holes totalling 1 547 m of the planned 3 000 m DD drilling programme, which began in December 2021, have been completed. Initial drilling successfully targeted areas east of and close to the existing underground mine, with the latest phase stepping out on strike to the eastern boundary of the mining licence, as well as to the west of Kilimapesa Hill. Results of 993 samples from Batch 2 have been received. The third batch of RC assay results are due to be delivered to the laboratory in the first week of June. These will include samples from holes on the western extent of Kilimapesa Hill and the mining licence. The RC rig is scheduled to move off Kilimapesa Hill in the first week of June and begin drilling campaigns on the first of three prioritised regional targets on the exploration licence. An updated resource from Kilimapesa Hill is expected at the end of the second quarter. “The second batch of sample assay results from the drilling programme on Kilimapesa Hill continues to confirm strike and depth continuity, with positive gold grades, as anticipated. “The high-grade intercept from DD hole 005 of 29.23 g/t gold over 1 m from 209 m provides further proof that the orebody is open at depth. This has particularly sparked my interest for future drilling and underpins the significant potential of the mine,” says CE Robbie McCrae. “With the drilling on Kilimapesa Hill almost complete, we look forward to delivering an updated resource at the end of June and are excited to be moving to the higher-grade regional targets to support continued resource expansion. “To date, we are very pleased with all aspects of the drilling campaign and look forward to not only an increase in ounces and confidence levels in our mineral resource but also, and importantly, improved information and quality of the existing resource to aid us in our planning and mining operations. Having only begun our in-house drilling in December 2021, we are very pleased with how well the drilling teams and the rigs are performing,” he adds.