Goods conveying is a critical aspect of production, packaging and distribution of numerous large consumer products and industrial components, says conveyor equipment manufacturer Melco Conveyor Equipment. Part of the Rulmeca Group, Melco supplies rollers, idlers, pulleys and motorised pulleys for heavy duty belt conveyors in quarries and mining applications, as well as rollers, drum motors and drive rollers for intralogistics. Based in Gauteng, Melco has been a part of the Rulmeca Group since 2006 and has been manufacturing conveyor equipment since 1970. Melco is able to locally assemble, service and repair a range of motorised pulleys (between 80 mm to 1 000 mm) at its Germiston-based manufacturing facility. Rulmeca’s premium quality and high reliability rollers allow for handling units in an efficient and inexpensive way, which contributes towards a lower cost finished product. The result of its advanced design capabilities coupled with exacting production processes is a range of products which the company says, “guarantees high performance delivery” even under the harshest of conditions. The group’s 17 production and sales companies around the world enable the company to service clients in more than 85 countries, the company tells Mining Weekly. Now celebrating its sixtieth year, the Rulmeca Group has invested heavily in research and development, as well as enhancing its manufacturing capacity, which it says cements its position as the “leading partner to the global materials handling industry”. Each product in Rulmeca’s, and subsequently Melco’s, comprehensive unit handling range of rollers, drum motors and 24V drive rollers is manufactured with “materials suitable for unique customer and industry requirements”. This, the company explains, ensures “optimum reliability and performance”, further demonstrating Rulmeca’s ability to customise solutions in the materials handling industry. Melco and Rulmeca operate in, inter alia, the mining, cement, quarry, ports and terminals, power plants, metals processing, packaging, industrial automation, food and beverage, and airport logistics industries.