LSE-listed Blencowe Resources says that recently completed studies on the metallurgical characterisation of flake graphite concentrate from its Orom-Cross project, in Uganda, has provided “very impressive results” that the company posits will generate significant interest in the flake graphite grades planned for production from 2023 onwards. The Orom-Cross Graphite project has a unique orebody composition, with specific element content that is unequal to other graphite projects, Blencowe states. Key results from the lab work sulphur content < 0.1% across all mesh size fractions. Also, the halogen content is suitable to meet advanced foil specifications. Moreover, the pH Values indicate neutral – alkaline; suitable for expandable graphite to meet fire retardant specifications. There is also a lower cost to purify as a result of lower specific elements. Over the coming months, additional post processing work for new potential applications for Orom-Cross graphite products will be completed. This work will support the progressive sales and marketing strategy focusing on both traditional and advanced graphite applications including both primary and secondary battery markets where demand for qualified graphite products is expected to continue growing. “The specific attributes highlighted above continue to underline the potential for Orom-Cross to deliver some of the highest quality graphite concentrate into world markets ahead as we transition to first production from 2023. “End-users are very discerning as to the quality of product they are seeking, hence these results are particularly encouraging in that our product can meet their high expectations, and thus provide our project with a strong base of customers to sell into as we start selling graphite from next year,” acclaims executive chairperson Cameron Pearce. “Orom-Cross is shaping up to become a world-class graphite project in all respects, with considerable size and scale to expand as necessary to meet anticipated strong future demand, high-quality concentrate as evidenced above to sell our products into various markets, low operational costs due to low strip ratio and other key advantages, and a good mix of flake sizes that guarantees a high overall weighted average selling price. “We look forward to sharing these parameters with the market via our prefeasibility study, which is due for completion shortly,” he adds.