Platinum group metals (PGMs) mining companies Impala Platinum Holdings (Implats) and Northam Platinum, and telecommunications company Vodacom have paid tribute to David Brown, who passed away on June 18. David Hugh Brown was born in Llandudno, Wales, on August 7, 1962, Mining Weekly can report. He matriculated at Bishop’s in Cape Town, in 1980 and after obtaining a BCom and CTA from the University of Cape Town, graduated as a chartered accountant in South Africa in 1988. His first job was as an articled clerk at Arthur Young, 1984, and his first paypacket R520 a month. He served as CFO of Implats from January 1999 before being appointed CEO in 2006, and subsequently retiring in 2012, joining the Vodacom board in January 2012, and serving as chairperson for Vodacom's Audit, Risk and Compliance Committee. He had a hands-on management style and liked leading from the front. “Leadership is about building teams by giving more autonomy for team members to shine and develop,” he once told Mining Weekly. His philosophy of life was that every journey begins with a small step “so get walking”, was his advice. What he expressed as his hope for the future was that the people of South Africa would get on with achieving what they were capable of achieving – “that is, greatness. We must embrace our diversity, as it is our strength. We need to trust one another as government, organised labour and companies if we are to save the mining industry – this is needed now more than ever,” he emphasised to Mining Weekly in an interview in 2013, shortly after leaving the platinum sector and heading what was then Coal of Africa Limited and what is now MC Mining, which had a market capitalisation of R650-million and 640 employees under his leadership. His notable achievements at Implats include securing the Royal Bafokeng Nation as the anchor empowerment partner for the group, and fostering this enduring partnership to the benefit of all stakeholders. Brown was also instrumental in leading the development of the group’s Zimbabwean operations, which grew the company into a multi-jurisdiction integrated PGMs producer. He had a hand in Impala’s accommodation strategy, which seeks to create sustainable human settlements and access to decent accommodation for all employees residing in informal structures. He was independent non-executive chairperson of the Northam Holdings Board and Northam Platinum Board, having joined the platinum group metals company  in November 2017. He served as a member of Northam’s remuneration committee and chairperson of Northam’s nomination committee and investment committee. Northam stated in a release that he contributed a wealth of knowledge, experience and expertise and expressed the company's appreciation of his "invaluable leadership and wise counsel". The directors of Northam Holdings and Northam Platinum extended their deepest sympathies to his family and friends. “I am shocked and saddened at the sudden passing of David, a stalwart of the Southern African mining industry. He was not only chairman of Northam’s board but a friend and colleague," said Northam CEO Paul Dunne. "He worked at board level in the sector for more than 23 years. My fellow board members and executive team join me in extending our sincerest sympathy to his family and loved ones, friends and colleagues. David instinctively knew that people are at the centre of all things mining. He will be sorely missed,” added Dunne.  