PERTH (miningweekly.com) – Queensland Deputy Premier and State Development Minister Steven Miles will be travelling to Japan next week with executives from Queensland government-owned energy company Stanwell Corporation to promote hydrogen investment opportunities. Miles will engage with Japanese investors about future renewables-related investment opportunities in Queensland. “Queensland has a long, productive and proud history of working with Japan for mutual economic advantage. Queensland exports more goods, services and energy to Japan than any other country in the world. “This trip is about looking at how we can take our valuable history of working together and transform it into future opportunities to produce green hydrogen from Queensland renewable resources. Doing this will mean potential investment in Queensland and jobs for regional communities.” The delegation will meet with around 100 Japanese investors from hydrogen, renewable energy, resources, and Olympics infrastructure sectors. “The meetings we have secured come off the back of the strong action we have taken as a government on renewable energy over the past 18 months,” Miles said. The Minister said discussions would include opportunities to pitch Queensland’s unique hydrogen and renewables advantages, including the combination of sunshine, land, water, and state-owned assets like ports and power-generation utilities. Stanwell CEO Michael O’Rourke said the company had been working hard to develop strategic partnerships to support the development of the state’s renewable energy future. “We’re working to provide low emissions solutions to commercial and industrial retail customers by developing a high-quality, value-for-money pipeline of renewable energy projects,” O’Rourke said. “And we’re keenly focussed on international partnership and export opportunities too. Through our Central Queensland Hydrogen project, we are working with major Japanese and Australian partner companies to establish a renewable hydrogen supply chain from Central Queensland to Japan.” Miles said the trade mission would be a good opportunity to demonstrate the government’s record of working with companies from across the globe in the renewable energy sector. “Earlier this year we signed the Central Queensland Statement of Cooperation with Stanwell, ACCIONA Energia, Rio Tinto Australia, Alpha HPA and Orica to ensure more opportunities for Central Queensland to decarbonise and create more jobs,” Miles said. “And on top of that we have created our A$2-billion Renewable Energy and Hydrogen Jobs Fund, which will see projects roll out in more industries, right across the supply chain.”