Clean technology innovator Nano One Materials and global mining and metals group Rio Tinto have entered into a strategic partnership providing iron and lithium products, collaboration and a $10-million investment into Nano One. This partnership and funding is aimed at accelerating Nano One’s multi-cathode commercialisation strategy and supporting cathode active materials (CAM) manufacturing in Canada for a cleaner and more efficient battery supply chain for North American and overseas markets. “The global transition to a low-carbon electrified economy will require millions of tonnes of battery materials, so it is critically important to produce these materials efficiently and with the lowest environmental footprint. “Rio Tinto’s partnership and support complement our recent announcement to acquire Johnson Matthey’s LFP business in the nearby community of Candiac, Québec, and amplifies the government of Canada’s mines-to-mobility initiative, which aims to encourage a localised battery ecosystem to serve the broader North American market,” says Nano One CEO Dan Blondal. He says Rio Tinto brings deep experience in high-volume production and technology commercialisation, as well as a growing battery metals business. “We are excited to be partnering with Rio Tinto, our shared vision will see many opportunities for collaboration as we drive for change,” he notes. Nano One’s patented one pot process and metal to cathode active material (M2CAM) technologies are noted to form a unique manufacturing platform that enables nickel-rich (NMC), iron-rich (LFP) and manganese-rich (LNMO) lithium-ion cathode active materials to be made sulphate-free from a range of battery metal sources with fewer steps, lower costs, less complexity and a much smaller environmental footprint. The technology applies to all lithium-ion battery chemistries for applications in electric vehicles, renewable energy storage and portable electronics. “Canada has positioned itself as a global leader in critical minerals and batteries, and with partnerships like the one we see here today with Nano One, Rio Tinto and our government, we continue to see the growing success of the Canadian electric vehicle battery market. Throughout recent years, our government has supported Nano One with over $10-million in funding to help bring its unique innovation to market, doubling down on Canadian innovation and Canadian workers’ expertise in the critical minerals sector,” comments Innovation, Science and Industry Minister Francois-Philippe Champagne. Rio Tinto and Nano One will, on closing, enter into a strategic collaboration agreement that includes a study of Rio Tinto’s battery metal products, including iron powders from the Rio Tinto Fer et Titane facility in Sorel-Tracy, Québec, as feedstock for the production of Nano One’s cathode materials. Rio Tinto will contribute know-how from its Critical Minerals and Technology Centre, which has developed expertise in the extraction and processing of critical minerals such as lithium and scandium, as well as minerals from Canada, the US and other international sources to further drive localisation of the lithium-ion battery value chain. Rio Tinto will collaborate on technical and business matters as may be required in developing, designing, constructing and operating cathode production facilities.