PERTH (miningweekly.com) – Oil and gas major Woodside has struck a deal with NYSE-listed Haliogen Inc for a commercial-scale demonstration project of Heliogen’s artificial intelligence- (AI-) enabled concentrated solar energy technology, which will be built in Mojave, California. Woodside in October announced a collaboration with renewable energy technology company Heliogen, involving the proposed construction of a 5 MW commercial-scale demonstration facility in California using Heliogen’s concentrated solar power technology. Under the project agreement, Heliogen will complete the engineering, procurement and construction of the facility, with construction expected to begin once permits are approved. The two companies have agreed to include the scope and associated funding from Heliogen’s previously announced $39-million award from the US Department of Energy to deploy Heliogen’s renewable energy technology in California. This means that in addition to commercial-scale demonstration of Heliogen’s 5 MWe module, the project will also include the deployment and testing of an innovative approach to converting the thermal energy produced by Heliogen’s facility into power, which has the potential to deliver higher efficiencies with a smaller footprint than traditional steam turbines. In addition to the project agreement, Heliogen and Woodside have also signed a collaboration agreement to jointly market Heliogen’s technology in Australia. Under this arrangement, the companies expect to define product offerings that use Heliogen’s modular technology for potential customers, including Woodside, in Australia and are establishing a roadmap to identify and engage with those customers. The Australian collaboration agreement includes an objective to deploy further commercial-scale modules of Heliogen’s heat and power offerings which may be combined with a hydrogen offering, strengthening Woodside’s role in the energy transition to lower carbon energy sources. The companies are also in similar discussions in relation to Heliogen’s technology in the US “We are thrilled to be working with leading Australian energy producer, Woodside. Our agreements represent a pivotal next step in the commercialization of Heliogen’s breakthrough concentrated solar technology and the decarbonization of heavy industry,” Heliogen founder and CEO Bill Gross said. “We are also pleased to share that, along with these agreements, our strategic alliance with Woodside includes Woodside taking an equity participation in Heliogen. The proposed Mojave facility will further advance our discussions with Woodside for additional opportunities aiming to produce carbon-free heat, power and hydrogen to help them achieve their sustainability goals.” Woodside CEO Meg O’Neill pointed out that Woodside had set a $5-billion investment target by 2030 for new energy products and lower-carbon services. “Our collaboration with Heliogen on this innovative technology supports our commitment to building a low-cost, lower-carbon, profitable, resilient and diversified portfolio,” she added.