West-Africa focused resource development company Nimba Development Company (NDC) has been transferred control of Société de Développement Nimba (SDN), formerly Zali Mining and prior to that West African Exploration (WAE), the owner of the Nimba iron-ore project. Alongside NDC, which has an 85% shareholding, the government of Guinea holds the remaining 15% in SDN. NDC and the government of Guinea have agreed to work together to advance the development of Nimba, as well as associated transport infrastructure to encourage responsible economic development in the Nimba region of Guinea. NDC is a UK-registered company with an international, mining experienced management team and Guinean and International shareholders. SDN is a Guinean-registered company with rights to develop the iron-ore assets adjacent to, but not intruding into, the Mount Nimba Strict Nature Reserve. It is noted that it is a priority of SDN and its shareholders to ensure that the Mount Nimba Strict Nature Reserve and its flora and fauna are protected. As such, all mining development will be subject to stringent international environmental protection standards with adherence monitored by the United Nations Educational, Scientific and Cultural Organisation to ensure there is no negative impact. In addition to the development of the mine, and to ensure that the iron-ore reaches global seaborne markets, a rail extension will be developed to connect the Nimba region to the existing railroad in Tokadeh and the port of Buchanan on the Liberian coast. It is intended that this transport infrastructure will also be made available to other users to encourage increased investment in south-eastern Guinea, as well as to increase connectivity for individuals across Guinea and Liberia. “On behalf of everyone at the NDC, I would like to express how honoured we are to be working alongside the Guinean government and representatives of the community in the Nimba region. "Together, we have an opportunity to accelerate economic development in south-eastern Guinea and develop an iron-ore facility that will, for the first time from this region, export iron-ores from Guinea through Liberia to the coast,” comments NDC CEO Steven Din. He indicates that the next step is to work with its development and infrastructure partners to finalise the necessary feasibility studies and agree detailed, future plans. “I look forward to implementing NDC’s long-term strategy and helping catalyse the creation, in West Africa, of a third, global iron-ore province. Alongside Western Australia and Brazil, West Africa can be a globally important iron-ore producer, delivering long-overdue economic development for Guinea and Liberia,” Din says.