PERTH (miningweekly.com) – Dual-listed gold miner Perseus Mining has extended the mine life of its Sissingué gold mine, in Côte d'Ivoire, until March 2026. The ASX- and TSX-listed company on Monday said that average tearly gold production is forecast at 72 000 oz, at an average all-in site cost of $1 261/oz. An updated life-of-mine (LoM) plan has estimated the mineral resource for Sissingué at 7.2-million tonnes, grading 1.7 g/t gold for 394 000 oz of gold at the end of December. The plan also estimated a proven and probable reserve of 5-million tonnes, grading 1.8 g/t gold for 282 000 oz, with ore drawn from pits at Sissingué, Fimbiasso and Bagoé. “The Sissingué gold mine has been an important part of Perseus’ geopolitically diversified asset portfolio since commencing commercial production in 2018 with an estimated 4.5-year mine life. Since then, the mine has consistently produced gold in excess of forecasts and importantly, generated significant amounts of free cashflow,” said Perseus MD and CEO Jeff Quartermaine. “This updated life-of-mine plan incorporates the processing of ore from satellite deposits at Fimbiasso and Bagoé as well as the Sissingué gold mine, and results in the life of the Sissingué operation being extended out till at least March 2026, which enables Perseus to continue generating material benefits for all of our stakeholders, including the residents of our host communities at Fimbiasso and Bagoé.” Based on the LoM schedule, mining and processing at Sissingué gold mine will be completed in 2026. Mining will be finished in February 2026 and processing will be completed the following month, March 2026. In this period the mill feed will be supplied from Bagoé deposit supplemented with stockpiled mineralised waste. The use of mineralised waste will enable the mill to operate at full capacity, resulting in lower unit processing cost, Perseus said. By the end of March 2026, approximately 650 000 t of mineralised waste stockpiles will remain. This material may be processed at a later date subject to it being economically viable.