NYSE- and TSX-listed Iamgold on Monday announced the appointment of Peter O’Hagan to its board of directors with immediate effect. O’Hagan has 35 years of experience in commodities, natural resource investing, capital markets and structured finance. He worked at Goldman Sachs from 1991 to 2013, where he was a partner from 2002 to 2013 and was most recently co-head of global commodities. From 2016 to 2019, O'Hagan was an MD at The Carlyle Group, a global investment firm where he focused on industrial and natural resource investments within the $4-billion Equity Opportunity Fund. Immediately prior to joining Carlyle, he was an operating advisor at KKR & Co. in the Energy and Real Assets group. O'Hagan is currently a director of Triple Flag Precious Metals and Rigel Resource Acquisition. He was a board member of Stillwater Mining from 2015 to 2017 until its sale to Sibanye Gold. Iamgold said that the addition of O'Hagan was part of the ongoing renewal process of the company's board of directors. The Canadian miner and shareholder RCF Management last month reached an agreement on leadership changes, which led to the appointment of Maryse Belanger, David Smith and Ian Ashby to the board as independent directors. Following the 2022 annual shareholders' meeting, the board would consist of eight independent directors, plus one executive director, once the permanent CEO is appointed. Gordan Stothart resigned as CEO in January, amid a strategy review. "We are pleased to welcome Peter to the board of Iamgold," commented Belanger, who is chairperson of the board. "Peter has a proven track record managing complex, multibillion-dollar global businesses in a highly regulated environment with an emphasis on strong corporate governance. His expertise, strategic insight and broad experience will strengthen our board in fulfilling its responsibilities to our stakeholders and in supporting our management team, as we pursue the opportunities ahead to build value responsibility in our business. We look forward to Peter's counsel and contributions."