As innovation and technology drive dramatic changes to the world’s economy, Ontario is positioning itself to be a global leader in supplying the critical minerals that will fuel that change with the release of its first-ever Critical Minerals Strategy. The strategy, unveiled by Premier Doug Ford on Thursday, is a blueprint to connect industries, resources and workers in the province’s north to the future of manufacturing in the south, building up home-grown supply chains. “Doing so has never been more important as we secure game-changing investments in our auto sector to build the electric vehicles and batteries of the future using Ontario minerals,” he said. The Critical Minerals Strategy is a five-year roadmap to better connect the mines in the north with the manufacturing sector in the south, in particular to Ontario-based electric vehicle (EV) and battery manufacturing; tap into new and growing markets, including electric vehicles, batteries, telecommunications and national defence; and secure Ontario’s place in the global supply chain. The strategy focuses on six priorities: To ensure companies have the tools they need to find the mines of the future, the province is investing C$24-million over three years in Ontario’s Junior Exploration Programme, which includes C$12-million for a critical minerals funding stream. The province is also investing C$5-million over two years in a new critical minerals innovation fund that will support research for extraction and processing in the north. “We believe there is an incredible opportunity to connect our northern and southern economies to build a made-in-Ontario supply chain for emerging technologies such as EVs,” said Minister of Northern Development, Mines, Natural Resources and Forestry Greg Rickford. “Our government is building an advanced manufacturing supply chain that will create economic opportunities for Ontarians across the province, including Indigenous communities. We want the world to know that Ontario is ready to supply our allies with a reliable source of critical minerals.” Geopolitical forces are fuelling a surging demand for reliable sources of critical minerals in international and North American markets. Ontario’s world-class environmental, social and governance standards make it the perfect destination for environmentally responsible investors. Ontario is ready to benefit from the global shift to a cleaner economy. “Ontario has what it takes to develop and build the car of the future through emerging technologies and advanced manufacturing processes,” commented Economic Development, Job Creation and Trade Minister Vic Fedeli. “Through our Driving Prosperity plan and our first-ever Critical Minerals Strategy, our government is staking Ontario's claim to the emerging North American EV battery industry and positioning the province to leverage its critical mineral wealth.”