Gold miner Barrick Gold says that, since acquiring the former Acacia Mining assets, in Tanzania, in September 2019, it has re-established North Mara and Bulyanhulu as “world-class” mines, and that it has also rebuilt their social licence to operate. President and CE Mark Bristow told Mining Weekly this week that independent consultants Synergy Global Consultants had concluded, after a second site visit, that Barrick had made considerable progress in mitigating the environmental, social and security risks at North Mara. Synergy’s visits were prompted by allegations of historical human rights abuses at North Mara, made by UK-based watchdog RAID. Barrick said RAID declined an invitation to participate in on-the-ground independent interviews associated with Synergy’s assessment. “These mines were a mess when we took them over. The government had closed North Mara’s tailings facility because of safety concerns, Bulyanhulu was at a standstill, the State refused to deal with Acacia and relations with the host communities were in bad shape,” Bristow noted. “We fixed the mines, established a first-of-its-kind joint venture with the government to oversee their management and the 50:50 distribution of the economic benefits they generate, and set about re-establishing them as valued community members. “Among other things, the tailings facility was raised to international standards by the agreed deadline, and fully effective grievance settlement committees and procedures were set up at both mines. “Thanks to the mines, the standard of living of their neighbours has improved through better access to food, education, healthcare and housing, as well the creation of jobs and business opportunities,” Bristow said. For example, he highlighted that North Mara was supporting 21 agribusiness projects specifically employing women, young people and those with disabilities. An independent human rights assessment carried out at North Mara last year by the human rights consultants Avanzar, which interviewed a range of local stakeholders, found that most respondents now welcomed the mine’s presence, Barrick posited. It added that Avanzar had also developed human rights training modules which have been rolled out at North Mara and Bulyanhulu. Bristow noted that, against this background, it was “disappointing” that RAID was questioning Barrick’s human rights record. RAID last week released a statement which indicated that, since the takeover, four people had been killed and seven injured by the Tanzanian police in the community, which it alleges are responsible for security at the mine. “North Mara employs a local security company whose guards are unarmed. The Tanzanian police’s role is to preserve law and order in the community and around North Mara. The mine is obviously not responsible for their conduct. “It’s worth noting, however, that the government has agreed to provide human rights training for all officers serving in the area. If RAID has evidence of the deaths and injuries it alleges, it should bring this to the attention of the Tanzanian attorney general without delay,” Bristow said. He mentioned that, in January, North Mara hosted a site visit for nongovernmental organisations, including Voluntary Services Overseas, Lawyers Environmental Action Team, Business and Human Rights Tanzania, the Legal and Human Rights Centre and the International Peace Information Service, and in line with its commitment to transparency, it would be doing so again. “In the meantime, our Sustainability Report for 2021, to be released in the second quarter of the year, will provide a detailed insight into the implementation of Barrick’s global human rights policy and practices,” Bristow said.