PERTH (miningweekly.com) – The Minerals Council of Australia (MCA) has welcomed the federal government’s extension of the Boosting Apprenticeship Commencements program, saying it will help create more qualified trade workers, critical for Australia’s workforce of today and tomorrow. Prime Minister Scott Morrison over the weekend announced a A$365.3-million investment that will support an extra 35 000 apprentices and trainees get into a job. Morrison said the extension of the successful Boosting Apprenticeship Commencements and Completing Apprenticeship Commencements wage subsidies would build on the record number of Australians currently in trades training. “By backing 385 000 apprentices in their training we’re boosting the pipeline of workers Australia is going to need for a stronger economy and a stronger future. These programs deliver certainty for business so they can go and hire another apprentice chef, another apprentice hairdresser, another apprentice plumber. It is about getting Australians skilled and into jobs right now. Treasurer Josh Frydenberg said this continued strong support for the skills sector would help lock in Australia’s economic recovery by delivering opportunities for apprentices and certainty for businesses. “The 2022-23 Budget will outline the government’s long term economic plan to create more jobs,” the Treasurer said. Enrolments for the Boosting Apprenticeship Commencement wage subsidy, which provides employers with 12 months of wage subsidy support, are being extended to the end of the 2021-22 financial year. Any business that receives the Boosting Apprenticeship Commencement wage subsidy will also then be eligible for extended support through the Completing Apprenticeship Commencements wage subsidy for the second and third year of a Boosting Apprenticeship Commencement-supported apprenticeship. As of 24 March 2022, over 73 000 businesses have been supported to put on an apprentice or trainee through Boosting Apprenticeship Commencements subsidy. MCA CEO Tania Constable said on Monday that while the extension of the program until the end of June 2022 to grow Australia’s skilled workforce is a positive move, the MCA has called for it to be permanently funded, given the program’s success but also to acknowledge the long-term economic benefits of increasing apprenticeships. “The MCA has identified that electricians, engineering tradesperson, mechanical and automotive electricians, are essential for the digital transformation of mining. Mining has helped sustain the Australian economy and the budget throughout the pandemic and continues to prepare for the demands of the future world – high tech and lower emissions. “Over 73 000 businesses have accessed the Boosting Apprenticeship Commencements program because it provides vital wage support during the first year of an apprenticeship. Apprenticeships provide the opportunity for a highly skilled, highly paid career for life. “The actions of the mining industry, including the MCA’s Industry of Choice Framework, have resulted in a sustained increase in women and Indigenous Australians choosing an apprenticeship or traineeship in the mining industry,” Constable said. Pointing to the latest data from the National Centre for Vocational Education Research, Constable noted that more than 10 000 people are currently in an apprenticeship or traineeship in the mining industry. Women comprise more than 20% of newly commencing apprentices and trainees. More than 10% of newly commencing apprentices and trainees are Indigenous Australians. “The Boosting Apprenticeship Commencements and the Completing Apprenticeship Commencements programs have helped the mining industry support an additional 6 700 apprenticeships since the end of 2020. “These apprenticeships have been supported right across the mining supply chain all across the country,” she added.