Business organisation Business Leadership South Africa’s (BLSA’s) former CEO Michael Spicer has passed away, the organisation says, adding that he was instrumental to BLSA, where he was CEO from 2005 to 2011. Born in 1953, Spicer passed away on March 10. BLSA says Spicer was a well-respected and formidable businessperson and leader. He had experience in business, government relations, education, economic policy and the wine and tourism industries, it adds. He joined BLSA, formally known as the South African Foundation, in 2005. “When he joined the organisation, it was clear to him that the old foundation had to be completely rebranded and restrategised. In the same year, he transformed the South African Foundation into what it is known as today, BLSA. “During his time at BLSA, it was clear that the organisation represented the largest companies – and he aimed to have 100 of the largest and mainly JSE-listed organisations as BLSA members. He prided himself in almost reaching the 100-goal mark and had 90-plus members,” BLSA highlights. Although he was no longer BLSA CEO, he actively continued to participate in council meetings and consistently weighed in on BLSA’s position and views, the organisation says. At the time of his passing, he was an independent director at Adcorp Holdings. He was appointed independent director in August 2013. For 20 years, Spicer was an executive director at Anglo American, served as a board member of SA Tourism and the International Marketing Council, which later became Brand SA. “BLSA extends their deepest condolences to his loving wife, Ireen, their sons, Nicholas and Simon, his extended family, friends and colleagues. Mr Spicer leaves behind a great legacy. “BLSA thanks his family for sharing him with South Africa and the business community. "The memorial service and funeral details of Mr Spicer will be shared once they become available,” BLSA says. “We are profoundly shocked on hearing of the passing of Michael who played such a significant role in our country’s history and championing business. Our deepest condolences go to Michael’s family," mining industry organisation the Minerals Council South Africa CEO Roger Baxter says. “He was a remarkable person who achieved so much good for so many people. As an executive director at Anglo American, we worked closely on a number of issues,” he adds. Baxter indicates that during Spicer's time at Anglo American, and working closely with then-chairperson Gavin Relly, he played a key role in engaging the then-banned African National Congress (ANC), opening the way for business to engage the exiled party and start political negotiations that culminated in the landmark 1994 elections and peaceful transfer of power. "Michael was a driving force behind unifying big business in its engagement with the government. He served as CEO of Business Leadership South Africa, an influential organisation," highlights Baxter.