PERTH (miningweekly.com) – Luxury vehicle manufacturer Mercedes-Benz will partner with ASX- and Aim-listed Neometals’ battery recycling joint venture, Primobius, for the design and construction of a battery recycling plant. Mercedez-Benz said that it had founded a subsidiary called LICULAR, which would cooperate with Primobius as part of its push to develop a holistic and sustainable recycling approach for lithium-ion batteries. Primobius is its preferred technology partner for the conceptual design and construction of a planned battery recycling and waste disposal recycling plant at Mercedes Benz’s Kuppenheim operations in Southern Germany, which will mark Mercedes-Benz’s first entry into the field of battery recycling. Based on preparatory work carried out by Primobius and LICULAR, Neometals on Monday said that it expected the recycling plant would have a nominal capacity of 2 500 t/y and would be built in two stages with the first stage, consisting of mechanical dismantling, starting production in 2023. Mercedes-Benz said that it was investing a double-digit million euro amount in research and development, as well as in the construction of the carbon-neutral pilot plant at the Mercedes-Benz location in Kuppenheim. The project has received the prospect of funding under the Battery Innovation Support Program of the German Federal Ministry of Economics and Climate Protection. Neometals on Monday confirmed that Primobius was finalising discussions with Mercedes-Benz regarding the planned cooperation, and said that the formal agreements relating to the cooperation agreement were expected to be signed between Primobius and LICULAR, following negotiations under an earlier informal non-binding memorandum of understanding between the parties. “We are proud that Mercedes-Benz, one of the greatest names in the automobile industry, has announced its intention to partner with Primobius. Mercedes-Benz has made public its clear commitment towards sustainable battery recycling, with Primobius as its preferred technology partner for the design and construction of an integrated recycling plant in Kuppenheim,” said Neometals CEO Chris Reed. “Lithium battery recycling supports conservation of resources, decarbonisation and supply chain resilience and we are excited to assist Mercedes in its goal to re-use recovered materials for the manufacture of new cells for Mercedes-EQ vehicle models.”