PERTH (miningweekly.com) – The resources sector has welcomed a A$128.5-million funding package from the federal government to modernise the operation of the Environment Protection and Biodiversity Conservation (EPBC) Act. Minister for the Environment Sussan Ley on Tuesday said that the measures, to be included in this month’s Federal Budget, will help protect the environment, while supporting economic recovery and helping to create jobs in regional and rural communities. The government announced that A$62.3-million will be invested in the delivery of as many as 10 regional plans in priority development regions, which will protect areas of environmental significance, streamline assessments and manage cumulative impacts. A further A$37.9-million will support the streamlining of assessment processes including A$10-million to progress the single touch approval process and A$27.9-million to continue on time assessment determinations which have risen to 96% in the last three years. Furthermore, A$28.4-million will support informed decision-making including A$12-million to modernise the environmental offsets policy, A$9.5-million to improve compliance, A$4.9-million to strengthen the knowledge base of protected plants and animals and A$2-million to scope a new advisory committee to provide expert industry and technology advice to government. “This is a package that will improve the quality and reliability of data used in assessments and decision-making, ensure greater transparency and flexibility around environmental offsets and reduce duplication and delay in the assessment and approval process,” Ley said.

“It represents another important step in delivering much needed environmental reform that reduces unnecessary delay and duplication, while strengthening safeguards.” Minister for Resources and Water Keith Pitt highlighted the importance of regional planning in further streamlining environmental approvals.

“The 10 new regional plans will streamline development approvals, including those for crucial resources projects, by removing the need for a project-by-project approval under national environment law,” Pitt said.

“This will boost investor confidence by identifying areas within a particular region where development activities may be undertaken while ensuring that strong environmental protections are maintained.” The Minerals Council of Australia has welcomed the funding, with CEO Tania Constable saying the changes would help provide greater certainty for businesses to invest in regional Australia, supporting local communities and jobs, and furthering sustainable development. “Additional funding for administration of the Act, compliance and building the environmental knowledge base will also provide greater confidence for all parties. “The establishment of an advisory committee to provide expert industry advice will improve understanding of industry, including minerals development within EPBC Act processes. The minerals industry has long-advocated a coordinated approach to environmental assessments and approval processes, founded in reliable data, effective administration, modern systems and processes.” The Association of Mining and Exploration Companies (Amec) has also welcomed the announcement, with CEO Warren Pearce saying the reform package would provide greater certainty, strengthen compliance, and streamline assessment and decision-making processes. “The mining and exploration industry needs an approvals framework that provides clarity and certainty for proponents to invest in new projects, while ensuring strong environmental safeguards. Today’s announcement is a further step forward in achieving this,” said Pearce. “Amec has been advocating to the government to prioritise the streamlining of assessments and processes, through a single touch approval process and it is especially pleasing to see federal government targeting this opportunity through this package.” In addition to the announcement made today, A$47-million has been allocated by government to the expansion of the Digital Environmental Assessment Program, to ensure assessments are based on consistent data allowing them to be made more quickly and with greater transparency. “These reforms will help reduce the unnecessary duplication and delay on environmental approvals without compromising environmental outcomes and allow the industry to continue to support the economic recovery of Australia,” said Pearce.