PERTH (miningweekly.com) – Queensland government-owned energy company Stanwell Corporation has joined Rio Tinto Australia, Alpha HPA and Orica and Spanish multinational ACCIONA, in joining the Queensland government to unlock renewable opportunities in the state. Stanwell has signed up for the Central Queensland Statement of Cooperation. “We are unlocking opportunities for Queensland to create more jobs as the world shifts towards decarbonisation,” Deputy Premier and Minister for State Development Steven Miles said. “By bringing together key players in the region, we can leverage our state’s traditional strengths and thrive in the global transformations ahead. “With their major Japanese and domestic partners, the company is progressing their feasibility study for a large-scale green hydrogen project to supply both domestic and export customers,” “Having Stanwell join the Statement of Cooperation makes sense and is a good step forward for Central Queensland’s growing renewables and hydrogen industry.” Minister for Energy, Renewables and Hydrogen Mick de Brenni said Queensland was on the cusp of establishing a large-scale renewable hydrogen industry through Queensland’s publicly-owned power company Stanwell. “Stanwell is a major player in the renewables sector, and their landmark memorandum of understanding with ACCIONA will enable Queensland’s largest solar project, providing clean and renewable energy to one of Australia’s largest and most promising green hydrogen projects, expected to drive A$4.2-billion in hydrogen exports,” De Brenni said. “Renewables and green hydrogen are the fuel to create more jobs and more industry for Queensland. “Our global partners are looking for leadership and certainty in the hydrogen supply chain and the government’s focus of efforts through Queensland’s publicly-owned energy companies is delivering those ingredients. “We are only at the beginning of an industry that will see billions of dollars added to our economy, creating prosperity for local residents for generations to come.” Stanwell CEO Michael O’Rourke said the company has been developing strategic partnerships across the supply chain to support the development of Queensland’s renewable energy future. “We want to provide low emissions solutions to commercial and industrial retail customers by developing a high-quality, value-for-money pipeline of renewable energy projects and this Statement of Cooperation will help us achieve that goal,” O’Rourke said. The Statement of Cooperation will secure the future competitiveness of Queensland, adding value to a natural energy advantage to drive employment and economic outcomes for the state by focusing on three areas. These include committing to industry by establishing certainty for current industry and growing demand, delivering a globally competitive energy solution that is centred around firmed, low-carbon electricity for industry, and growing the industries of the future in Central Queensland by creating an enabling regulatory environment, strengthening regional skills and employment to lower capital intensity, and planning for the infrastructure to enable industry development.