PERTH (miningweekly.com) – The Queensland government has called on resource communities to apply for their share of over A$50-million in project funding to improve infrastructure and enhance community wellbeing. Premier Annastacia Palaszczuk said not-for-profits and local councils were encouraged to apply for round two of the Resources Community Infrastructure Fund (RCIF). “The RCIF is a A$100-million partnership formed between the Queensland government and resources sector to ensure we keep giving back to the resources communities who support our state’s economy,” the Premier said. “We’re now pleased to open round two and keep the project pipeline flowing following the December 2021 activation of A$47-million in round one local projects.” Deputy Premier and State Development Minister Steven Miles said applications open on Thursday and are scheduled to close on April 27. “Applicants can seek from A$100 000 up to A$8-million per project. This will ensure that communities will gain the range of projects that best suit their needs. The infrastructure funded will be in addition to planned state and resource-company-funded community infrastructure,” said Miles. Minister for Resources Scott Stewart said the RCIF is a voluntary partnership between the Queensland government, resource companies, and the Queensland Resources Council (QRC). “The Queensland government has committed A$30-million to the fund with participating Queensland coal and mineral resources companies contributing A$70-million. Together, we are recognising the importance of resources sector communities in rebuilding Queensland’s economy from the impacts of Covid-19. “The first round of the program included providing funding to build a new pool in Charters Towers, a hybrid library, museum and community services hub in Moura, and an early intervention and learning centre in Townsville.” “The projects not only deliver projects that further improve liveability in resource communities, they also create more jobs and more opportunities for regional Queenslanders.” QRC CEO Ian Macfarlane welcomed the opening of round two funding. “The QRC is the peak body for coal, metal and gas explorers, producers and suppliers and we are always looking for ways to support our resources communities. The QRC is proud our industry is contributing a total of A$70-million to the RCIF and that local communities have the opportunity to seek funding for their important local projects.” An expert advisory committee will continue with its role of considering RCIF applications in round two, and will recommend projects that increase a resource community’s access to services to meet the community’s needs, maximise its potential, or enhance community wellbeing, and enhance community safety, reduce social inequality or benefit disadvantaged communities. Applications that supplement planned community infrastructure investment by the state and resources sector, by delivering new projects as soon as possible that provide benefit to Queensland’s resource communities, will also be considered.