PERTH (miningweekly.com) – Diversified miner Anglo American has reported a fatality at its Moranbah North coal mine, in Queensland. The contractor fatality occurred on Friday evening during a lifting incident, and an emergency response was immediately initiated. “We are devastated by the loss of one of our colleagues at Moranbah North Mine, and our thoughts are with their family and friends,” CEO of Anglo American, Tyler Mitchelson, said. “Our focus is on supporting our colleague’s family and all those involved in the tragic incident. We have services on site to support our workforce at Moranbah North mine. We have ceased mining activities at Moranbah North and will undertake a full investigation with relevant authorities, so we can understand how this incident occurred. “We have also made the decision to suspend operations across all our sites to commence Stop for Safety sessions today, focusing on applying critical controls and risk management, including during lifting activities and ensuring we are always maintaining chronic unease. These sessions will continue to be held with ongoing crews in the coming days. “We extend our sincere gratitude to our first responders at Moranbah North, who have done an incredible job in a difficult situation, as well as local emergency services.” Contractor Metarock told shareholders that it was providing support to the family and its employees impacted by the incident. “Our immediate thoughts are with the family, friends and workmates of our colleague. We will continue to support our collegue’s family and our teams as we all work through this tragic event,” said MD Tony Caruso. Metarock subsidiary Mastermyne will be undertaking an independent investigation into the incident, and Metarock has commissioned an independent organisational review following the Moranbah North incident and the fatality at its operations at the Crinum mine in September last year. The scope of the review will cut across the Mastermyne and PYBAR operating divisions and recommendations or improvements will be implemented immediately. Meanwhile, the Minerals Council of Australia (MCA) and the Queensland Resources Council (QRC) have both expressed condolences, with the MCA saying that the industry was continuing its efforts to eliminating fatalities, injuries and occupational illnesses, and building and sustaining respectful workplaces. “The QRC is extremely saddened to learn of the death of a mine employee at Moranbah North underground coal mine in Central Queensland on the weekend,” said CEO Ian Macfarlane.  “Maintaining the health and safety of our employees is a core value of the resources sector, and we want all workers to return home safely to their families at the end of each work day.  “This is a tragedy no family, no company and no community wants to experience.”