PERTH (miningweekly.com) – A 1 MW clean hydrogen plant will form part of a renewable microgrid planned for the Diantree community, in Far North Queensland. The federal government this week announced that it had awarded Volt Advisory Group A$18.75-million over three years to develop a highly innovative renewable energy microgrid for the Daintree region, supporting more than 200 jobs in Far North Queensland. The grant is being delivered under the Daintree Microgrid Program, following a feasibility study completed under the A$50-million Regional and Remote Communities Reliability Fund. The renewable energy microgrid will incorporate an 8 MW solar farm, 20 MWh of battery storage and a 1 MW clean hydrogen plant. In recognition that the Daintree rainforest is in the World Heritage-listed Wet Tropics of Queensland, the project aims to avoid disturbance in the area by deploying the microgrid along roadways and on previously cleared land. Minister for Industry, Energy and Emissions Reduction Angus Taylor said the Daintree microgrid would ensure the Daintree community had a more affordable, more reliable and a more resilient electricity supply. “This is a major win for communities in the Daintree Rainforest, which will see reduced pollution and noise from diesel generators, and will be a valuable demonstration of solar to hydrogen technology,” Taylor said. “The renewable and hydrogen microgrid will use cutting edge technology to reduce emissions and drive down costs by ending the community’s reliance on costly diesel generation.” Assistant Minister to the Minister for Industry, Energy and Emissions Reduction Tim Wilson said the microgrid would generate direct benefits for the Daintree community. “Building this world-leading renewable microgrid is a giant leap forward in building Australia’s carbon-neutral future. This renewable microgrid will deliver cheaper, reliable power and is an essential investment in the Daintree community,” Wilson said. “Once completed, the microgrid will displace more than four-million litres of diesel fuel consumed in the Daintree each year. This highly innovative project demonstrates the public-private leadership required to get Australia to carbon neutrality by 2050. “It also presents a significant opportunity to develop key learnings that can be applied as we pursue further microgrid options across Australia.” The project will start this year and the microgrid is due to begin operations by 2024.