Industry organisation Women in Mining (WIM) UK on March 8 announced that the nominations for the fifth edition of its 100 Global Inspirational Women in Mining (WIM100) would open from 10:00 GMT. “We thank our confirmed sponsors, BMO Capital Markets, Heidrick & Struggles and BCG, for their continued support of the WIM100,” the press release stated, adding that everyone is welcome to nominate inspirational women in mining by going to www.womeninmining.org.uk/wim-100-nominations-2022. Nominations would close on June 10. “The WIM100 has been a labour of love since its first edition in 2013. “Over the past nine years, this initiative has grown in size, stature and prestige, but the sentiment has always stayed the same – the WIM100 is a living history that galvanises the incredible impact women have made on the mining industry around the globe,” commented WIM UK MD Dr Stacy Hope. “Over the next several months, we will have the pleasure of reading hundreds of nominations that will inspire us. We thank all nominators in advance for taking the time to fill out our nominations form, the women in mining groups and trade organisations that help us amplify the initiative, and our committed sponsors, BMO Capital Markets, Heidrick & Struggles and BCG, who make it possible through their generous contributions,” she added. THE CRITERIA The organisation lists its criteria on the website and notes that a ‘WIM100 woman’ is a trailblazer, who perseveres in the face of adversity and who advocates for and empowers others. “A WIM100 woman is a pioneer. She is an innovator. She makes positive and impactful changes so the industry can operate in a more safe, sustainable and inclusive way. “A WIM100 woman offers proactive advocacy to those working in the mining industry and beyond. She empowers her colleagues to ensure everyone feels heard, welcomed and respected.” Finally, the organisation states, “a WIM100 woman is resilient and determined. She has the courage to speak up, challenge the status quo and break barriers”. Some of the women celebrated by their peers in the 2020 edition include Newmont senior geologist Florence Adu, Lucara Botswana MD Naseem Banu Lahri, Fortescue Metals GM Katie Day, De Beers carbon neutrality head Kirsten Hund, Harmony Gold FD Boipelo Lekubo, University of Arizona assistant professor of practice Rosa Maria Rojas Espinoza, Endeavour Mining supply chain VP Djaria Traore and Anglo American Platinum CEO Natascha Viljoen.