A new yearly event calling for innovative research proposals to address the mining industry’s toughest sustainable development challenges has been added to the Investing in African Mining Indaba (Mining Indaba) conference agenda this year. The Innovation & Research Battlefield, an event convened by Investing in the Mining Indaba, Business for Development and the Development Partner Institute (DPI Mining), will be a high-profile platform showcasing early-stage innovations focused on this year’s challenge – building sustainable post-mining economies. The event organisers intend to attract a pool of global applicants by connecting academics, researchers, the private sector, nongovernmental organisations and young people with a vested interest in sustainable mining to decision-makers in the sector. “We want the Innovation & Research Battlefield to be a catalyst for closer, more agile collaboration between the private sector, academia and the mining sector to solve critical issues facing the industry, and to bridge the gap between proposed solutions and the funding needed for their implementation,” says DPI Mining executive director Wendy Tyrell. Business for Development CEO Karen James adds that it is essential to develop and test innovative solutions to the sector’s tough sustainability and development challenges against a backdrop of climate change, automation, reduced global mobility a growing environmental, social and governance (ESG) agenda and rising stakeholder expectations. “We are thrilled to be the platform of choice for our partners, DPI Mining and Business for Development, to help launch this essential, timely and innovative event forging deep links between the worlds of academia, business and technology to ensure mining grows sustainably and helps to meet the sector’s ESG mandates,” says Mining Indaba advisory board co-chairperson and head of content Tom Quinn. Ten participants, shortlisted through pre-defined evaluation criteria, will have the opportunity to pitch their research proposals to judges and attendees at Mining Indaba, which will be held in Cape Town from May 9 to 12. The pitch can be done virtually or in person. BHP and The University of Queensland’s Sustainable Minerals Institute is a sponsor of the $28 600 prize. The  Innovation & Research Battlefield event is hosted by Sheila Khama, former CEO of De Beers Botswana and natural resources policy adviser at the World Bank and African Development Bank. The judging panel includes a representative from Business for Development and DPI Mining. Applications, which are to be submitted online, will close on April 6. Successful first-round applicants will be notified on April 15 and invited to pitch in the second round.