Drilling technology solutions provider Rosond's main focus for this year will be consolidating the company’s rapid expansion as it plans for further growth by taking on additional work in sub-Saharan Africa, says Rosond MD Ricardo Ribeiro. “This year, we are going to spend a lot of time digitising our operations. We are in a unique position in that we have 28 drill rigs with telemetry systems in an 80 km radius in the Northern Cape. The data collection here is going to be significant in terms of data prediction, software development and drilling efficiencies,” he says. Rosond expects to secure further work in the Southern African market. It has also appointed a new operations director to drive growth and a head of technology. In 2021, the company completed the delivery of 28 state-of-the-art drill rigs to the Kolomela and Sishen mines, owned by mining multinational Anglo American’s Kumba Iron Ore subsidiary. This formed part of a R2-billion, five-year tender to supply Anglo American with drilling technology as it modernises its geoscience operations. Further, another key focus for Rosond has been enterprise supplier development (ESD), in the Northern Cape specifically, which is empowering smaller businesses as key mining services providers. “We are hoping that our ESD programme will result in a successful business model that can be rolled out elsewhere,” Ribeiro adds. Rosond has 1 500 employees and pioneered all-female drill-rig crews at Kumba in the Northern Cape, where 20% of its workforce is female. This is largely owing to the fact that its next-generation drill rigs are fully automated, thereby removing the need for strenuous manual labour. The drill rig technology developed by Rosond in conjunction with Comacchio has also resulted in significant health and safety records at Kumba. This is a significant achievement given that 80% of the workforce on the two projects there are new recruits, all from local or host communities and trained by Rosond. “We are very proud of our safety record, which speaks for the combination of our training and technology,” says Ribeiro. “Rosond provides customised solutions to cater for specific client requirements. We look at the mining operation and the surrounding environment to be able to supply the best solution possible, taking into account technology, commercial considerations and the host communities we work with. “We can design drill rigs for surface and underground mining applications. Mining clients supply us with the necessary specifications required to develop a concept design. This is a key differentiator for us, as we do not supply anything off the shelf,” he says.