The Mandela Mining Precinct (MMP) this week displayed two lighter, faster, quieter and more energy-efficient rock drills at its premises in Johannesburg, showcasing new technology that could improve safety in South African mines. The drills were manufactured by two local original-equipment manufacturers, Hydro Power Equipment (HPE) and water drilling specialist Novatek, as part of the MMP’s industry innovation challenge, the Isidingo Drill Design Challenge. The drills underwent several weeks of underground tests at Impala Platinum’s operations, in Rustenburg, successfully demonstrating that they could be used in the harsh underground environment of South African mines. Drilling is a primary function of mining, but existing technology has presented mines in South Africa with various challenges, including fatigue experienced by drill operators, owing to the time required to assemble and disassemble a heavy rock drill, MMP explains in a statement. Moreover, traditional drills used in gold and platinum mines are extremely loud and place operators close to the rock face being drilled. This presents various occupational health and safety risks. HPE and Novatek each independently designed, prototyped and tested a rock drill that satisfies the production and occupational health and safety requirements of gold and platinum group metal mines. The challenge has brought South Africa a step closer to improving efficiencies and safety in mining, while creating new opportunities for local manufacturers to operate within the mining value chain. The MMP is a public-private partnership between the Department of Science and Innovation (DSI) and the Minerals Council South Africa, managed by the Council for Scientific and Industrial Research. DSI technology localisation, beneficiation and advanced manufacturing chief director Beeuwen Gerryts says the basic premise of open innovation, as cited in the department’s White Paper on Science, Technology and Innovation, is to make the innovation accessible to all active players so the knowledge or outputs can circulate more freely. “Through the MMP’s first open innovation challenge, we are proud to present the mining industry with two innovative rock drills that have demonstrated faster, more efficient and, importantly, safer drilling,” he notes, encouraging the mining industry to continue supporting local manufacturers. “The Isidingo Drill Design Challenge was intended to promote a culture of innovation among local manufacturers, and what we have seen during the underground tests demonstrates the understanding by our manufacturers that innovation is a key guiding principle for achieving a modernised mining industry,” says Minerals Council senior executive for modernisation and safety Sietse van der Woude.