PERTH (miningweekly.com) – National Energy Resources Australia (Nera), in partnership with the Western Australian government, has launched a new initiative called LETs Pitch WA, aimed at supporting the growth of low emissions technologies. The LETs Pitch WA programme will provide small to medium-sized enterprises (SMEs) with the chance to take advantage of bespoke growth opportunities and vital pathways to domestic and international markets. Nera CEO Miranda Taylor said on Wednesday that achieving net zero by 2050 requires radical transformation of the energy sector, and expediting low emissions technology development will be integral to Western Australia’s, and Australia’s, decarbonisation. “For decades the energy sector has powered Western Australia’s economic growth. And now as a nation we have the potential to become a leading source of low emissions energy, technology and expertise. If we can drive a transition to cheap, reliable, clean energy, we can grow new manufacturing industries powered by renewable resources. “By supporting low emissions technology development in Western Australia, the state can both help to expedite the decarbonisation of its primary industries and, importantly, grow new, globally competitive, technology supply chains that can service local and international markets," said Taylor. “In creating LETs Pitch WA, Nera is driving collaboration and innovation to enable the decarbonisation and diversification of Australia’s energy sector and, in turn, helping to grow WA LETs businesses to deliver technology solutions both locally and to the world.” Expressions of interest are sought from Western Australia-based SMEs with solutions in energy efficiency, hydrogen and hydrogen-based fuels, low emissions electricity, electrification and fuel switching, non-energy emissions, and carbon capture and storage or carbon capture, utilisation and storage. Following the expressions of interest process, shortlisted SMEs will be given tailored mentoring through a customised pitch-readiness programme that will help them to clarify their value proposition, develop a business canvas and business capability, as well as other support to increase the likelihood of future success. With this preparation, the SMEs will then pitch their technology to a judging panel comprising “blue-chip” investors, venture capital and industry experts, with the winners offered the chance to travel to the ONS 2022 exhibition and conference in Norway as part of the “Team WA” delegation.