PERTH (miningweekly.com) – The Australian Petroleum Production & Exploration Association (Appea) is backing a new study by the Western Australian LNG Jobs Taskforce into opportunities for carbon capture, utilisation and storage (CCUS) and carbon capture and storage (CCS) development in the state. The study will help inform the future of the state’s existing gas industry and the development of new industries and projects. CCUS and CCS have the potential to assist with decarbonising the gas industry and other emission-intensive industrial sectors, achieving the Western Australian government’s net zero by 2050 target, regional development and future job creation. Energy producers Eni and BP have joined existing taskforce members Shell Australia, Chevron, Santos and Woodside, as well as National Energy Resources Australia and the Department of Jobs, Tourism, Science and Innovation as partners in the study. The Commonwealth Scientific and Industrial Research Organisation and the Global Carbon Capture Storage Institute will conduct the study, which is expected to be completed in the second half of 2022. Appea Western Australian director Claire Wilkinson said the research would provide critical intelligence on how best to deploy CCUS and CCS to decarbonise not just the state’s gas industry but many other sectors as well. “The oil and gas industry is committed to achieving net zero greenhouse gas emissions by 2050, with several companies targeting even earlier timeframes. Decarbonising our existing and future operations means there is a need to invest in renewable energy and lower emission technologies and this study will help inform the investment opportunities in this space. “CCUS and CCS have key roles in lowering the carbon intensity of gas production and in supporting the development of a blue hydrogen industry here in WA - a key enabler to a viable hydrogen industry. “The study will help us chart a way forward with natural gas set to be a key part of a cleaner energy mix.”