PERTH (miningweekly.com) – The Queensland government has blocked the development of unlisted Fox Resources’ Bundaberg coal project, saying it was not in the public interest. Resources Minister Scott Stewart on Thursday refused Fox Resources' application for a mineral development licence (MDL) to further their exploration for coal north of Bundaberg. “The government supports the resources industry for the jobs it creates and the royalties it generates to fund teachers, nurses and police officers. However, as I have today advised Fox Resources, I have considered a significant amount of information, including submissions from Fox and detailed information from my department in reaching this decision. “There is significant adverse community sentiment about this mineral development licence. This is particularly in relation to the potential negative environmental, agricultural and social impacts in the Bundaberg region. “I have given significant weight to the concerns of the community, which include Bundaberg Regional Council and Members of Parliament. Fox has not adequately demonstrated to me they can resolve or offset the public’s concerns,” Stewart said. “I also considered the option of approving the MDL with conditions, but I’m not satisfied this could adequately mitigate the identified risks, potential negative impacts and community concerns.” Fox had applied for the MDL, which is an exploration permit, that would have allowed the company to conduct geophysics during the first year, as well as seismic surveys and drilling for a further four years. Stewart said Queensland has a strong assessment process for resources projects and will continue to assess each proposed project on its own merits. “The resources sector continues to support about 80 000 jobs across Queensland and represents $48-billion in exports and generates millions of dollars in royalties for all Queenslanders,” Stewart said. “It has been a key part of the [Annastacia] Palaszczuk government’s economic recovery from Covid-19 supporting thousands of jobs throughout regional Queensland. “The Palaszczuk government has supported more than $21-billion in resource sector investment and created more than 8 000 jobs.”