PERTH (miningweekly.com) – The Western Australian government will partner with the resources industry to pilot a new Job Ready pre-employment programme that connects participants with entry-level employment opportunities in the drilling sector. The Driller's Offsider Job Ready programme is among a suite of new skill sets developed in collaboration with Western Australian industries to deliver short, sharp training for job seekers and young people enabling them to upskill or reskill in industries with a need for skilled workers. The new programme will provide participants with skills to work safely on site, apply first aid and CPR, work safely at heights and operate and maintain a four-wheel-drive vehicle. “There is a strong demand for driller's offsiders and the government is continuing to deliver new training programs to meet workforce needs across the resources sector,” Education and Training Minister Sue Ellery said. "This new Job Ready programme offers a low-cost and fast-track training option to help Western Australians into entry-level driller's offsider jobs, while providing a pathway to full drilling operations qualifications and employment. "Strong industry involvement in the programme helps to link participants with employers and orientation with the working environment to ensure the industry is a good fit for them." Expressions of interest for the new programme are now open, with the first intake of students scheduled to start training with registered training organisation Australian Training Management next month. The training is free for all job seekers, young people, and concession-eligible students and low-fee for non-concession students. Prior to commencing the training, participants will undertake a one-day induction delivered by industry to introduce them to a driller's role and working environment. On completion of the course, students will be connected with opportunities to transition into employment, undertake a traineeship with a participating employer or further their training to gain a drilling operations qualification. Employers of students who transition into traineeships will be able to access State and Australian government incentives or wage subsidies. The Driller's Offsider Job Ready programme was developed in consultation with the Resources Industry Training Council and key industry partners, who form part of a reference group that oversees the programme. It is part of the state government's A$5.5-billion investment in Western Australia Recovery Plan initiatives to upskill the Western Australian workforce and enhance employment and training opportunities following the Covid-19 outbreak. The resources sector has welcomed the state government’s intervention. “The Resources Industry Training Council applauds the Western Australia government on this response to what is clearly an area of urgent need for the state’s mining and resources sector. The challenges of the current skills shortage for the sector have been well-documented and drilling is one area in which the impact has been particularly acute,” Resources Industry Training Council (RITC) manager Amanda Hamilton said.

“This programme will help address both current and future needs by equipping participants with the skills they need to be on site right now, and also providing pathways to training that can deliver further drilling qualifications down the track. “Importantly, the Driller’s Offsider Job Ready initiative has been developed with the assistance of the drilling industry and, in particular, the support of the Australian Drilling Industry Association.” RITC is a joint venture between the Chamber of Minerals and Energy for Western Australia and the Australian Petroleum Production & Exploration Association that works to address skills needs in the state.