Environmental, social and governance (ESG) imperatives play a prominent role in decision-making across the African mining sector, with intensified awareness from all stakeholders. It is for this reason that this year’s Investing in African Mining Indaba will explore what ESG means in practice for Africa’s mining operators, communities and jurisdictions. As economies emerge from the global pandemic and countries grapple with climate change, ESG continues to play a core role in mining across Africa, with investors, funders and consumers placing greater trust in organisations that show a long-term interest in these standards. However, despite the upside potential for Africa, the mining and minerals sector faces continued ESG risks with concerns around safety and security, climate change, community relations and environmental impact. Therefore, the Indaba organisers have said that “it has become an even greater imperative for the sector to get the implementation of these ESG strategies and policies right to create meaningful change”. “ESG will not be just a buzzword at the conference, but rather provide the opportunity for mining companies to consider implementing meaningful strategies and policies as a central part of doing business to not only drive investment into mining across the continent but to ensure a competitive, sustainable and accountable sector,” the organisers said in a release on April 11. This year’s Mining Indaba will make the ESG topic a main stage focus area under this year’s overarching theme, “Evolution of African Mining: Investing in the Energy Transition, ESG and the Economies”. The programme will explore and share industry lessons on the progress made in mining's ESG-focused investment environment, unpack the role of technology and examine the risks, uncertainties and opportunities post-COP26. Speakers and industry representatives, including International Council on Mining and Metals CEO Rohitesh Dhawan; Exxaro Resources CEO-designate and minerals MD Dr Nombasa Tsengwa; and Extractive Industries Transparency Initiative Africa director Bady Baldé, “will holistically tackle ESG issues and explore the energy transition, which demands ESG rigour and provides the potential to grow our economies”. Other important industry bodies sending their key executives focused on building ESG frameworks will include the Fair Cobalt Alliance, the Development Partner Institute and the Natural Resource Governance Institute.