PERTH (miningweekly.com) – Major BHP has struck a renewable energy agreement with Enel Green Power to underpin construction of Stage 1 of the Flat Rocks wind farm near the Great Southern town of Kojonup. The agreement with Enel meant that BHP had secured sufficient renewable energy to cover all of the power requirements for its major nickel operations in Western Australia. Stage 1 of the Flat Rocks wind farm  is expected to create 120 jobs during construction and up to 10 locally based roles once operational. Construction is due to begin in July 2022, and first power is expected in October 2023. The new wind farm will comprise the 18 tallest wind turbines in Western Australia at a tip height of 200 m and is expected to produce 315 GWh a year. Under the renewable power purchase agreement (PPA) with Enel, the Flat Rocks wind farm will generate the equivalent of 100% of the current power requirements for Nickel West’s Kalgoorlie nickel smelter and Kambalda nickel concentrator from 2024. The combined output of the Flat Rocks wind farm, through the PPA, and the recently announced Merredin solar farm PPA is enough to cover the current power requirements of all three of Nickel West’s downstream facilities; the Kalgoorlie nickel smelter, the Kambalda nickel concentrator and the Kwinana nickel refinery, which are connected to the South West Interconnected System (SWIS). Renewable energy from the Flat Rocks wind farm is expected to reduce Nickel West’s market based Scope 2 greenhouse gas emissions by just under one-third against 2020 baseline levels from 2024 based on current forecast demand. The combined effect from BHP’s agreements for the Flat Rocks wind farm, the Merredin solar farm and the Northern Goldfields solar project is expected to reduce Nickel West’s total market based Scope 2 greenhouse gas emissions by nearly 60% against 2020 baseline levels from 2024, based on current forecast demand. The Italian-owned Enel and Moonies Hill Energy, owned by local landowners, have been working on the co-development of Flat Rocks wind farm since 2016. The windfarm covers the Shire of Kojonup and Shire of Broomehill-Tambellup. The area around Kojonup, which is one of Western Australia’s oldest towns and has a rich local history and large Italian population, is an ideal location due to its strong winds and being situated on the southern part of the SWIS. The Flat Rocks wind farm will have a capacity factor of nearly 50%, which is one of the highest in the country, complementing BHP’s use of solar from the Merredin solar farm, well-positioning Nickel West for a reliable supply of renewable energy over a 24-hour period. “BHP supplies high quality nickel to world markets for use in electric vehicle batteries and other growing technologies that will support global decarbonisation,” BHP Nickel West asset president Jessica Farrell said.

“We are taking great strides in making our operations more sustainable and strengthening BHP’s position as a nickel supplier of choice to global customers. 

“We are delighted to partner with Enel Green Power as the first customer of the Flat Rocks wind farm, creating jobs and supporting the Kojonup community with the introduction of a renewable energy industry to the area.” 


Western Australian Minister for Mines and Petroleum; and Energy Bill Johnston congratulated the two companies on the PPA.

“BHP is creating a new standard for social and environmental outcomes, and setting a great example for other Western Australian mining companies. They’re also helping contribute to the government’s target of net zero carbon emissions by 2050.”