PERTH (miningweekly.com) – Australian Prime Minister Scott Morrison has promised A$82-million in funding towards hydrogen projects in the Hunter region of New South Wales, as his election trail continues. Through the Clean Hydrogen Industrial Hubs program, Morrison has promised A$41-million in project support for the A$163-million Port of Newcastle’s hydrogen hub, and up to A$41-million for ASX-listed Origin Energy’s Hunter Valley H2 hub implementation project, which has a total project value of over A$200-million. The funding is complemented by the A$100-million committed in the 2022/23 Budget to support pre-final investment decision activities and early works to make the Port of Newcastle’s infrastructure ‘hydrogen ready’. The Hunter hydrogen projects are estimated to create over 2 300 jobs when operational, with even more local construction jobs possible through the port upgrades. Morrison said the Coalition government’s economic plan was delivering for the Hunter, with this investment unlocking jobs for generations to come. “Australia will be a world leader in hydrogen development and exports, and the Hunter region is critical to realising our nation’s potential,” the Prime Minister said. “The Hunter has been an essential part of Australia’s energy security for decades, and our investment today locks in the Hunter’s clean energy future. The Coalition’s economic plan is securing new opportunities for the local, highly skilled workforce in the Hunter, creating a strong economy and stronger future. “Ensuring affordable and reliable energy, while meeting our emissions reductions targets, is key to the Coalition’s national economic plan.” Minister for Industry, Energy and Emissions Reduction Angus Taylor said the Hunter region provides great potential for both hydrogen production and export opportunities, with Newcastle being the biggest port on the east coast. “Both of these hub projects are backed by significant private sector funding and have strong industry partners here and overseas. These multimillion-dollar commitments show the faith both industry and government have in the Hunter,” Taylor said. “With existing supply chains to key consuming countries, such as Japan, and high future local hydrogen demand for uses such as electricity generation, gas blending and transport, the Hunter is a highly competitive location for a clean hydrogen hub.”