The Minerals Council South Africa says the safety performance of Assmang’s Black Rock mine is “remarkable and deserving of the highest praise and accolades” after the mine achieved 13 years and ten-million shifts without a fatality. For the South African mining industry, which is grappling with the impact of the Covid-19 pandemic and a regression in overall safety performance, Black Rock “stands out as a beacon of hope” for the sector to aspire to and emulate, the council says in a statement. Black Rock, which is jointly owned by African Rainbow Minerals and Assore – both Minerals Council members – has proved underground mining can be done safely and with zero harm – evidenced through keeping its 6 000 employees (of which 1 600 are contractors) safe. Making the safety performance even more remarkable, says council, is that it was achieved during a decade-long modernisation and refurbishment programme at the Gloria and Nchwaning mines and processing plants. Managing safety at these sites requires the “highest levels” of change management, the council states. “A performance like this can only be achieved by an unwavering focus by management, organised labour and employees on safety, adhering to company safety protocols, training and initiatives,” the Minerals Council says. In addition, the council says work done by the Department of Mineral Resources and Energy’s (DMRE’s) mines inspectorate played a critical role. “Black Rock is living the zero-harm performance we are striving to make possible for Minerals Council member companies through our dedicated safety work, peer learning and engagements,” says the council. SAFETY MEASURES At a special board meeting in December 2021, the DMRE agreed to eight interventions to address the industry’s safety performance following 74 fatalities in the year – up from the 60 of 2020 and 51 in 2019. The first measure is increased visible leadership at mining operations, showing that safety starts at the top of mines management. “Safety is not only to be practiced at our mining operations but outside the gates too, as we make our way home, and with our families and friends,” says the council. The council adds that safety is a lifestyle choice and a mindset. Hence the Minerals Council’s Khumbul’ekhaya (Nguni word for remember home) strategy on health and safety, while a tripartite milestone goal is to ensure every mine worker returns from work unharmed every day. Meanwhile, the Minerals Council and its partners – the Council for Scientific and Industrial Research, at the Mandela Mining Precinct – are working hard on modernising South Africa’s mining industry to make it possible to mine with zero harm to its employees. Related to this, the Minerals Council has embarked on a five-year, R46-million investment into the implementation of a fall-of-ground action plan that was launched on the National Day of Health and Safety in Mining in July 2021. “We have held a day of learning on how our members are addressing falls of ground, a leading source of fatalities. We are resolved to remove this risk from underground mining,” the council highlights. Another major area of work for the Minerals Council is the implementation of a holistic, risk-phased plan for collision-prevention systems with ecosystem readiness for industry-wide adoption by December 2023. This will help address fatalities arising from mobile machinery.