PERTH (miningweekly.com) – The Association of Mining and Exploration Companies (Amec) has welcomed the next round of funding from the Western Australian government under its Exploration Incentive Scheme (EIS) co-funded drilling programme Mines and Petroleum Minister Bill Johnston on Thursday announced the recipients of the EIS programme, with a total of A$6.74-million in grants being offered to 47 companies and prospectors, including 25 Amec members. Johnston noted that 107 applicants submitted proposals for Round 25 of the Department of Mines, Industry Regulation and Safety's scheme, the second-highest round since it began in 2009. Twenty-two of the successful explorers are searching for battery metals such as nickel or nickel-cobalt, lithium and rare earth elements. “The surge in exploration shows how confident mining companies are in the future of Western Australia's resources sector,” the Minister said. “This interest comes on the back of an exceptional 2021, which saw Western Australia achieve record resource sales of A$230-billion, and exploration is the bedrock of this success. “It's especially pleasing to see lithium, nickel and cobalt at the forefront of exploration activity; these efforts can help position Western Australia at the centre of the global battery minerals supply chain.” Amec CEO Warren Pearce said the EIS programme is a significant government investment into mineral exploration drilling, offering up to a 50% refund for eligible projects. “It helps exploration companies to leverage matching private funding to undertake innovative greenfield exploration drilling. To see 107 applicants submit proposals for this round reflects the current strength of the resources and exploration industries, as well as the confidence mining companies see in future of the sector in Western Australia. “On the back of promising discoveries, interest in Western Australia’s abundant mineral prospects is steadily increasing, reflected in the continued popularity and availability of programmes like the EIS,” said Pearce.