After two years, the African Mining Indaba will once again be held in-person at the Cape Town International Convention Centre, albeit in May, rather than its conventional February placing. This change of date will be a one off, with the change made to cater to Covid-19 restrictions to allow the event to once again be held in-person. The intention is for the Indaba to be held in February in 2023. The return to in-person follows the virtual version held in 2021, a two-day, studio produced event which brought together over 6 000 attendees. This year’s event will be held under the theme: “Evolution of African Mining: Investing in the Energy Transition, Environment, Social and Governance (ESG) and the Economies”. Mining Indaba advisory board co-chairperson and head of content Tom Quinn said in a media briefing on April 7 that these three elements had come to fore over the past two years, and are interconnected as well. He pointed out that South Africa has a considerable opportunity in the burgeoning hydrogen economy, owing to its endowment of platinum group metals, as well as a real focus on the just transition, amid its ongoing power supply struggles. He emphasised that integral to the Indaba platform this year is that mining has to be the building blocks for the energy transition. “From cobalt, to copper, nickel, tin, and rare earth metals, there are plethora of metals and minerals that need to be secured, not just on the African continent, but worldwide to ensure decarbonisation can happen,” Quinn emphasised. Therefore, addressing these topics, he said the Indaba would host a hydrogen panel discussion, in which Anglo American Platinum CEO Natascha Viljoen will participate. Moreover, the United Nations will also represented in energy transition conversations. Quinn also highlighted that the World Coal Association and Exxaro Resources, among others, will partake in a forum on the just energy transition and South Africa’s journey from coal in new areas of energy. He also mentioned considerable executive level speakers at the event, including Gold Fields CEO Chris Griffith, Barrick Gold president Mark Bristow and Anglo American's new CEO Duncan Wanblad. Quinn indicated that Anglo will be participating considerably in the Indaba, through its Kumba Iron Ore and De Beers subsidiaries; and with various keynote sessions on sustainability, applications of technology, decarbonisation, the ESG conversation and stakeholder relationships in terms of bringing together mining projects, not just in South Africa, but in other jurisdictions in which it operates. Further to investors and mining companies, he said the Indaba would also include representatives from community groups, as part of its push to make it more inclusive. For example, the Archbishop of Cape Town will be a key part of the Sustainability Day. Moreover, the Indaba will provide platforms to the Fair Cobalt Alliance and Women in Mining. Quinn also indicated that a geopolitical expert from New York, Veracity founder and CEO Steven Fox, will be giving a keynote update Ukraine-Russia situation and the impact that this will have on African commodities and metals. In terms of heads of State, he indicated that the Indaba has already confirmed the attendance of the President of Zambia and the President of Botswana. Further, Zambia's Finance and Business and Technology Ministers will also attend. Moreover, the Indaba is in discussion with the Prime Minister of Gabon, as well as the leadership team in the Democratic Republic of Congo, regarding their possible attendance. It is also in discussions with South African leaders, with an open invitation extended to President Cyril Ramaphosa. Quin said the Indaba had confirmed the attendance of 35 Ministers and 12 Ambassadors. Moreover, he indicated that the US State Department is considering sending a representative. Mining Indaba portfolio director Simon Ford said the response from the market to the event has been positive, with people keen to return to Cape Town and conduct deals and meetings in person. He acclaimed that the event is almost sold out, with its on track for over 5 000 attendees, which underpins this sentiment. Therefore, this year’s event will not have a virtual platform, however, some content will be recorded and made available online at a later stage, Ford said. He emphasised that Covid-19 protocols a required in South Africa will be observed to ensure the health and safety of attendees. This includes wearing of masks insides, social distancing within the venue, regular cleaning and sanitation, and attendees showing a negative Covid-19 test or proof of vaccination. Ford highlighted new programmes this year as including an Infrastructure and Supply Chain Forum, which focuses on the supply chain and service companies, and provides them with an opportunity to talk about how they service mining companies. Tied to this is a highly targeted matching making meeting session for service companies with mining companies which is expected to deliver a considerable return on investment for them, and then followed by a networking function for this group as well. Ford noted that the Indaba will host one-on-one events that are focused on investments. “Our primary reason for running the Mining Indaba, as it has been for many years, is to continue to drive investment into the African mining sector,” he said. He also mentioned the ESG Awards, which will be held on May 11, and will pay recognition to what junior mining companies are doing within the ESG space.