The new heap leach plant at East African gold producer Caracal Gold’s Kilimapesa gold mine, in Kenya, has produced its first gold following commissioning. “The company is pleased to confirm that the commissioning of its pilot heap leach plant has been successfully completed and first gold has been produced. “This first gold production has been achieved ahead of schedule and marks an important milestone in the wider expansion strategy currently being implemented to increase production to 24 000 oz/y at Kilimapesa,” the company said on April 11. The results from the pilot plant pad, consisting of the first 5 000 t lift on the pad of the heap leach, have exceeded expectations, including 53.4% recovery achieved within 14 days where a 60-day cycle is expected. Consumable consumption, cyanide and lime, was under budget. Further, first gold was poured within 14 days of initial pad loading and a second lift has been completed and under irrigation within 14 days. “Based on the results above, [Caracal] has approved the construction of the additional pads required to treat the 30 000 t of stockpiled low-grade material at 1.4 g/t and then support the current 15 000 t a month at 1.5 g/t production capacity. “Mining production initiatives have been initiated to ramp up from 15 000 t a month to achieve the planned 20 000 t a month,” the company said. Additional benefits arising from the heap leach plant completion, including efficiency gains, reduced operating costs and increased gold production, will be detailed in an upcoming quarterly report, which will also include an update on the overall expansion programme at Kilimapesa, Caracal said. “We have a targeted growth strategy in place to increase operational efficiencies and maximise gold recoveries and profitability at Kilimapesa. “To have delivered the first component of this strategy ahead of schedule is a fantastic achievement and testament to our commitment to maximise the value potential of our expanding gold portfolio. With further work programmes in the pipeline to enhance production even further and rallying gold prices, we are firmly poised for growth. I look forward to sharing further updates with shareholders on our progress in due course,” commented CE Robbie McCrae.