Dual-listed Galantas Gold will next month restart development and blasting at its Omagh mine, in Northern Ireland, and says production stoping is targeted for mid- to late June. The company reports that it has resolved geotechnical matters at the past-producing mine and that it has hired an experienced contract driller to assist with the startup of production. “Our team has made significant progress to recommence production at Galantas. The decision to delay the completion of the secondary egress prior to commencement of production by approximately six weeks is part of our commitment to best mining and operational practices for the long-term success of the Omagh project and mining in Northern Ireland,” says CEO Mario Stifano. Initial production is expected at 4 500 oz to 5 500 oz for the balance of the year from mine sequencing and production commencement during the month of June. The company is working with mining contractor QME to develop engineering plans to accelerate development to the Joshua Vein by 12 months, which will enable Galantas to mine from multiple headings and veins to provide greater operational flexibility with an expected positive impact on 2023 production while also providing drilling platforms to drill both Joshua and Kearney veins from underground. Meanwhile, the company has expanded its current prospecting licence holding in the county of Leitrim, bringing its total exploration land package in Ireland to 159.4 km2. Galantas’ exploration land package in Northern Ireland totals 437.3 km2 in Northern Ireland. The Irish Department of the Environment, Climate and Communications granted Flintridge Resources, a subsidiary of Galantas, prospecting licences for base metals, gold (ores of) and silver (ores of) for a period of six years, beginning April 28, 2022. Geochemical results derived from the Tellus Border project, combined with the occurrence of Dalradian-age lithologies and the north-east structural trend, indicate that the prospecting licence areas are prospective for base and precious metals. Historical records reference copper workings, in addition to more recent zinc and lead mining activity; both of which are situated within the new licence block.