PERTH (miningweekly.com) – The Queensland government on Wednesday announced a A$2.7-million funding support to bus company Emerald Coaches to trial buses powered with renewable hydrogen to transport mine workers and students in the Bowen Basin. Acting Premier and Minister for State Development Steven Miles said Emerald Coaches would be supported by a grant from round two of the A$35-million Hydrogen Industry Development Fund (HIDF). “The government is supporting the use of renewable energy for public transport across the state, including for longer-distance travel. This project will demonstrate the commercial viability of transitioning a regional bus fleet to new technology renewable hydrogen,” said Miles. The project will see Emerald Coaches integrate two hydrogen fuel cell electric buses into its fleet of 120 diesel buses by mid-2023. “The hydrogen fuel cell electric buses will service school routes and mine sites and will be capable of travelling hundreds of kilometres a day on a single tank of hydrogen. Refuelling will take place at the company’s Emerald depot and will mirror current diesel refuelling time, maintaining operational flexibility.” The total zero-emissions transition is estimated to cost A$100-million by 2040. Round two of the HIDF will see more than AS$20-million allocated to renewable hydrogen technology projects that are expected to support hundreds of highly skilled jobs. Minister for Energy, Renewables and Hydrogen Mick de Brenni said Emerald Coaches was the latest addition to the Queensland section of the national Hydrogen Superhighway that would open up clean energy for domestic use in heavy transport. “Projects are being progressed across Queensland from the tip of Cape York to the border with New South Wales, and will ensure we keep bringing world-leading energy technology to Queensland,” De Brenni said. “This is the HIDF’s largest investment so far in our growing hydrogen supply chain. The government is investing to establish a long-term, thriving domestic hydrogen industry, giving industry like freight access to competitively priced lower-emission energy options. “The addition of Emerald builds on the tri-state memorandum of understanding with New South Wales and Victoria and delivers on our commitment to innovation, economic growth and more highly skilled jobs for Queenslanders.”