The export of green hydrogen is an opportunity South Africa should capitalise on, as are a number of other hydrogen opportunities that are available, says hydrogen-focused company Hydrogen Energy Applications (HYENA) CEO Niels Luchters. “Hydrogen and fuel cells provide a reliable energy source, as well as reducing carbon emissions when using green hydrogen.” HYENA is a spinout company of the University of Cape Town’s (UCT’s) Chemical Engineering Department. Luchters says energy sources, such as diesel generators, often present issues such as regular maintenance, noise and the spillage of oil and fuel. Consequently, HYENA introduced the POWER POD in 2020 as a diesel generator replacement. The fuel cell-based hydrogen generator converts liquefied petroleum gas (LPG) into usable electricity. Hence, the company aims to replace diesel generators with the POWER POD and is raising capital to develop its first full-scale product. However, the necessary infrastructure in Africa to build a green hydrogen economy is currently lacking, says Luchters. Implementing new technologies and developing new green hydrogen infrastructure will be costly and take time to implement, which, in turn, will limit the deployment of fuel cells and green hydrogen technologies. He adds that HYENA was, thus, inspired to create the POWER POD using LPG as the hydrogen carrier to make a hydrogen stream wherever clients need it and then generate electricity using the fuel cell. The company will deploy more fuel cell technology into the green hydrogen space using existing fuel. The company focuses on sub-Saharan Africa and its main target market is African telecommunications (telecoms) towers that require a reliable electricity supply, as many rely on diesel generators. “South Africa is an ideal location for us to start and is ideal for manufacturing. It's the doorway to Africa and the country has the necessary manufacturing skills.” The company also aims to expand into other markets, such as households and construction sites, that rely on diesel generators. HYENA began its research at UCT in 2014 and was incorporated as a business in 2018. It received investment from the University Technology Fund in 2020 as part of the SA SME Fund, which is a public limited liability company. Luchters says the funds were allocated towards derisking engineering. Meanwhile, the POWER POD is being developed as a prototype. It will be implemented and monitored at telecom sites to determine where improvements can be made to meet client requirements. Luchters says telecoms operators will benefit from the POWER POD, as its carbon emissions and operating costs are lower, with greater reliability compared to diesel generators.