Morocco-focused potash developer Emmerson has awarded the balance of the basic engineering scope of the Khemisset potash project, outside of the mineral processing facility, to Reminex – the engineering arm of Moroccan mining company Managem Group. This follows Emmerson awarding the basic engineering package for the mineral processing facility to Barr Engineering in November 2021, with the balance of the basic engineering scope to Reminex proceeding a thorough pre-qualification, competitive tender and negotiation process. Reminex has also partnered with the Canadian engineering firm BBA to add a further level of due diligence on design assurance, operational readiness and risk management. This configuration enables Emmerson to design the project infrastructures in compliance with Moroccan requirements whilst also benefitting from the additional experience of an internationally renowned partner. Further to this, Emmerson intends to engage in a long-term technical partnership of its own to undertake similar functions during the upcoming engineering, procurement and construction management phase. The scope of works included covers six packages, the first comprising a water supply solution to the mine site, the second a power supply solution to site and the third mine site access, including a highway junction. Package 4 comprises mine site infrastructure, while the fifth is for portal and access declines. Package 6 involves a tailings storage facility. The ability to award the basic engineering for the project has been facilitated by the proceeds from the recent strategic investment by the Singaporean fund Global Sustainable Minerals and Gold Quay Capital. This enables Emmerson to continue development at the Khemisset project alongside activities relating to financial close. Emmerson CEO Graham Clarke says the award of the Reminex contract comes as a result of a thorough competitive tender process executed by the Khemisset project team and enables the company to continue towards the start of full engineering, procurement and construction management (EPCM) during this year. “Reminex has extensive experience accrued over decades of operating within the Moroccan mining sector. Its substantial expertise will be vital for adapting our Khemisset project to the local standards and for the provision of advice and assistance in the remaining permitting and due diligence processes alongside basic engineering,” he says. Clarke adds that 2022 will be a transformative year for Emmerson as it executes the final workstreams towards construction. “We are expecting to make progress concurrently on drilling activities, basic engineering, discussions with other potential equity and lending banks, preparations for EPCM execution and finalisation of permitting activities.”