PERTH (miningweekly.com) – The Queensland government on Thursday released the Bowen Basin Pipeline concept study, which investigated potential gas pipeline pathways and optimisation of the Bowen Basin’s gas reserves to support the East Coast gas market for export and domestic use. The study also investigated opportunities to capture fugitive emissions from underground and opencut coal mines in the Bowen Basin to assist in Queensland’s efforts to reduce greenhouse gas emissions. The state government said in a statement on Thursday that a gas pipeline in Bowen Basin could future-proof gas supply, reduce emissions and help create jobs, a new study has found. Resources Minister Scott Stewart said the Bowen Basin Pipeline concept study found that opening the basin to gas development could bring environmental and economic benefits for Queensland. “The answer to domestic gas shortages and supporting our manufacturers is more gas production here in Queensland,” Stewart said. “Developing the Bowen Basin could do this, while also making a valuable addition to our transition to a low carbon economy.” Stewart said the project could make meaningful progress towards the government’s target of 30% reduction in emissions by 2030 and zero net emissions by 2050. “Modelling in the study showed that the reduction in fugitive emissions from coal mine methane capture outweighs the potential emissions impact from coal seam gas,” he said. “This means that the pipeline would bring low emission gas to market, and it could also reduce the emissions impact of coal mines in the area, which is a big win-win for all involved.” Stewart said the state government continued to ensure Queensland is doing the heavy lifting on gas supply and policy. “Since 2015 the government has released more than 80 000 km2 of land for gas exploration, over a quarter of it guaranteeing the gas will be for Australian consumers,” he said. “In a national first, we released land nearly three years ago exclusively for gas for the domestic market to boost essential supply to the east coast market, particularly our manufacturers.”