Metso Outotec will take the next structural development steps in its business portfolio, following the completed integration of its Minerals business and the successful turnaround of its Metals business. Metso is a process technology, equipment and services company serving the minerals, metals and aggregates industries. The company plans to change its business area structure and related reporting segments by transferring the Hydrometallurgy business from Metals to Minerals. The objective of the change is to accelerate Metso’s profitable growth in the minerals processing industry by more efficiently leveraging the opportunities and synergies in the minerals and hydrometallurgical processes. Having Hydrometallurgy as part of the Minerals business is expected to enhance customer service with a competitive and fully integrated planet-positive product offering, as well as resulting in closer integration with the customers’ processes through digitalisation. Going forward, gold and battery chemicals businesses are among the “interesting new synergistic growth areas”, the company says. A strategic review will be conducted in the remaining Metals business area, consisting of the Smelting, Metals and Chemical Processing and the Ferrous and Heat Transfer business lines, as well as related aftermarket services. The review will focus on evaluating the best environment for developing the Metals business and its strategic fit in Metso’s business portfolio. All potential options will be considered, including development by Metso, co-development with a partner or divestment. The review has no impact on the Metals business’ daily conduct, sales or project execution, which will continue with full commitment. Metso’s financial reporting will be adjusted to reflect the new segment structure as of January 1. The financial year 2021 will be reported in line with the segment structure used during 2021. The restated segment financials will be provided prior to reporting for the first quarter of this year.