Explorer and developer FPX Nickel has appointed Erin Wilson as its principal geologist to lead the exploration activities of the company’s projects, including the preliminary economic assessment-stage Decar nickel district in central British Columbia. Wilson was formerly the chief mine geologist of Pure Gold Mining and lead production geologist with Newmont. "We are happy to welcome Erin to our growing team and look forward to drawing on her deep experience in managing work programmes through the complete project development cycle," commented VP for projects Andrew Osterloh. "Erin has a strong track record of leading exploration teams in both supervisory and management roles, having planned, managed and executed work programmes covering early-stage, resource-stage and production-stage assets.  As we move our flagship Baptiste project toward a preliminary feasibility study and pursue the sizeable exploration potential at our new Van discovery, she will play a critical role in ensuring the company maintains a high standard of technical proficiency and mutually beneficial collaboration with our First Nations partners." In her previous role at Pure Gold Mining, Wilson had oversight and responsibility for mine site geological and block models, working with senior management in developing geological work programmes and managing a strong safety culture in compliance with company policies and occupational health and safety regulations. Prior to joining Pure Gold, Wilson worked in a number of roles for Goldcorp and Newmont at the Red Lake Gold Mines for nine years.  As the lead exploration geologist and production geologist at the Couchenour project, she developed and managed multimillion-dollar work programmes, supervising geological site personnel and integrating drill results for the growth of mineral reserves and resources at the project. FPX has granted 250 000 stock options to Wilson. The stock options have an exercise price of $0.55 a share and will expire on January 10, 2027.