PERTH (miningweekly.com) – Green energy developer Fortescue Future Industries (FFI) in December reached another target: producing hydrogen by using an electrolyser designed and built by the company’s in-house team. The company reported that a small team from its manufacturing arm had developed the innovative electrolyser in the Western Australia facility, producing industrial-grade hydrogen for the first time earlier this week. FFI has developed a number of new electrolyser technologies that will form part of their electrolyser patent family. The outcomes of these projects will inform FFI’s electrolyser technology selection going forward, as FFI works towards its target to produce 15-million tonnes of green hydrogen a year by 2030. “This is another outstanding achievement from our FFI in-house scientists and engineers – who are continuing to break new ground,” FFI CEO Julie Shuttleworth said. “The FFI team has designed and operated our own electrolyser system which will be key to developing FFI’s green hydrogen production into the future.” FFI chairperson Dr Andrew Forrest said the electrolyser was internally designed, built and commissioned by a small, dedicated team of experts. “The team spent thousands of hours on this project, facing setbacks along the way, but they pushed forward and managed to produce hydrogen before their stretch target date, something they should be incredibly proud of. “This is not the first time FFI’s team of experts have beaten their stretch targets. Earlier this year, FFI retrofitted a huge mining haul truck to run on hydrogen, producing only steam, in just 130 days,” Forrest said. FFI is in the process of installing solar panels at FFI’s Dawson Road facility which will mean the electrolyser will be able to produce green hydrogen in 2022. The stack that produced the hydrogen is a pressurised alkaline system. The internally designed supporting hydrogen gas management system is fully operational and will be used to test all of FFI’s prototypes and designs. Meanwhile, FFI in December also reached a deal with Refining NZ (RNZ) to investigate repurposing facilities at the RNZ Marsden Point oil refinery, in New Zealand, to produce green hydrogen and green hydrogen products. FFI and RNZ have signed a memorandum of understanding to study the commercial and technical feasibility of producing, storing, distributing and exporting industrial-scale green hydrogen and green hydrogen products from the decommissioned RNZ site as it transitions to an import-only fuel terminal. FFI will undertake feasibility studies that will assess key operational and commercial projections for the project and enable the development of a project timeline. Forrest said this announcement was an important step forward in FFI’s plans to turn fossil fuel emitters into zero carbon green hydrogen producers worldwide. “Green hydrogen can provide all sorts of advantages to local and export economies - and is the answer our planet needs now,” he said. “[Earlier in December] we announced we would look into producing green hydrogen at a retiring coal-fired power station in Australia, yesterday we shared our decision to progress to the next stage converting a grey ammonia plant to green, and today we are looking to kick off something similar at Marsden Point oil refinery in New Zealand. “Green hydrogen production at Marsden Point will potentially deliver energy security, good local jobs, and the decarbonisation of local heavy industry – all while reducing emissions for New Zealand,” Forrest said. The existing RNZ site has existing infrastructure such as a deep-water port, proximity to large electricity grid connections and an industrial water supply which FFI will investigate repurposing to produce green products. RNZ is based in Marsden Point and is the country’s only oil refinery and the leading supplier of refined petroleum products to the New Zealand market, including petrol, diesel, aviation fuel and other products. In November 2021, the board of RNZ made a final decision to convert the facility into an import-only facility, which meant around 65% of its existing site would be available for future growth opportunities once the transition had taken place, in April 2022.