TSX-listed First Quantum Minerals has embarked on a new GM Leadership Development Programme in Zambia to mould talented staff into capable leaders. This is expected to build on the success of the mining company’s CEO training programme that saw seven talented employees receive mentorship and training in senior management roles to drive long-term sustainable growth. “Twenty years ago, First Quantum had copper output of about 10 000 t/y and, as of 2020, we are producing more than 779 000 t, which shows the rapid rate at which we are growing. What has also become clear over the years is that we cannot maintain this growth without having a steady pipeline of leaders to underpin this growth,” says First Quantum Kansanshi Mining GM Anthony Mukutuma. First Quantum started leadership training four years ago with the CEO training programme, which ran concurrently with other initiatives like the secondary school and university scholarships programmes and skills training in partnership with the Trade School in Solwezi and other training providers. “However, these initiatives only give us the skills and trades we need in practical fields, and we need to get new leaders and managers to run the business,” Mukutuma said. “Our approach has always been to primarily look within for people we can develop into ready leaders to support the forecast growth. Our goal is to ensure that as we grow, we have capable leaders to grow with us,” he said. GM DEVELOPMENT
During the selection process for the GM Leadership Development Programme, department heads and team leaders recommend five to six people from their teams who displayed exceptional specialist skills and commitment in their area of expertise. The prospective trainees were then put through a series of psychometric and cognitive tests by an independent third party to ensure candidates are selected on merit. “The nomination happens at all levels so that no talent is missed. From an initial shortlist of 40 candidates, we ended up with six individuals who were admitted into the training programme. After a few months of training, we have seen significant growth in the trainees, in the way they are applying themselves in their current roles and in how they are interacting within their teams and with other stakeholders. This shows the value of the training,” he said. First Quantum partnered with leadership trainers FranklinCovey to facilitate the training, with influential leaders within the company, including the GM himself, spearheading the mentorship part of the programme. Plans for the next cohort GMs are already in place to continue developing leaders. In the First Quantum way, learnings from the maiden initiative will be taken on board to improve the programme, the company said. First Quantum Blasting and Technical Services senior mining engineer Samson Mutema added that there was a need for more companies to invest in upskilling their employees and allow them to reach their full potential. “Most of the time when you are being promoted into a new role you are moved based on your technical abilities. But few people are taken through the process of changing the way they work. In a leadership role, it is not just about your abilities, but also about the relationship you have with your team and how you can bring out the best in them. “Through the GM training programme, I have learned how to better engage with my direct reports and other colleagues and find common ground in our individual work philosophies to optimise operations,” he said. Programme participant Masida Gondwe, who is an information and communications development and integration specialist, said the programme had helped her gain the confidence to try innovative solutions to various operational problems the mine may face. “The training has helped me embrace First Quantum's Bolder, Smarter, Driven, Together core values in my everyday tasks. I am now bold enough to introduce new approaches to how certain departments operate and overcome challenges thereby helping to improve the company’s efficiency,” she said. First Quantum human resource specialist Ethel Chasha-Cruz, also a trainee under the programme, noted that such programmes played an invaluable role in building a rich reserve of capable leaders in the Zambian labour pool. “One of the key focus areas for the training is how honest introspection can help one form more meaningful partnerships with their team-mates. Thanks to the training, I am now able to work on the most critical parts of myself that would otherwise affect my relationship with my team,” she said.