The Bureau of Land Management (BLM) and the Nevada Division of Environmental Protection (NDEP) have approved the plan of operations (PO) and reclamation plan for the next phases of development and exploration work at American Lithium’s Tonopah Lithium Claims (TLC) projects. The PO authorises the company to construct 110 drill sites on the TLC project and the excavation of five test pits. American Lithium says the public comments received during the consultation phase of the environmental assessment have demonstrated “broad public support” for the project. American Lithium has provided a $1.4-million reclamation bond to the BLM and NDEP, through its surety agent. As such, all approvals are now in place to start drilling. Q & D Construction has been contracted to provide a sonic core drill rig to complete the in-fill and resource extension drilling planned under the PO on the existing TLC deposit, as well as additional exploration drilling outside the existing TLC resource area. This drill will complement the existing reverse circulation drill presently conducting exploration drilling at TLC North (Crescent Dunes). “This is a big step for the company and enables the launch of a major development programme, which we believe will provide all the data/results needed to move quickly from a robust, maiden preliminary economic assessment and into the pre-feasibility/feasibility phase on our core TLC project,” says CEO Simon Clarke. “We are also excited about the resource expansion and infill drilling programme at TLC, as well as continuing our successful exploration drilling program following up on the thick lithium claystone discovery at TLC North. While our primary goal remains delivering the PEA as quickly as possible, the potential to significantly expand our measured and indicated resource numbers would also add significant value to the Project and provide even stronger positioning for the move into feasibility.” The TLC lithium claystone project is in the richly mineralised Esmeralda lithium district.