TSX-V-listed copper/zinc/gold/silver exploration and development company Foran Mining has appointed David Bernier as COO, effective immediately. Bernier has more than 25 years of deep operational experience gained from a series of progressively senior roles across mine design, project development and production management at various operations in Canada. "When it comes to mining, the most important natural resource is people, and Dave is truly an exceptional person. Since joining Foran as project director in April 2021, Dave has been instrumental in advancing the McIlvenna Bay project," said Foran Mining executive chairperson and CEO Dan Myerson. "With extensive polymetallic, base and precious, asset-level experience ranging from permitting to mine construction and production, Dave is the perfect leader to build this world-class mine and mining camp, and to advance Foran as a company. Dave possesses an inspiring work ethic and has an incredible amount of common sense. His inherent passion for success and his prioritization of people at the forefront of all planning and decision-making are unique and invaluable attributes. We are very fortunate to have Dave Bernier as our COO," he said. McIlvenna Bay is a copper/zinc/gold/silver-rich volcanic-hosted massive sulphide (VHMS) deposit intended to be the centre of a new mining camp in a prolific district that has already been producing for 100 years. McIlvenna Bay sits 65 km from Flin Flon, Manitoba and is part of the world class Flin Flon Greenstone Belt that extends from Snow Lake, Manitoba, through Flin Flon to Foran's ground in eastern Saskatchewan, a distance of over 225 km. McIlvenna Bay is the largest undeveloped VHMS deposit in the region. "I am thrilled to be part of this talented and innovative team and look forward to continuing the advancement of McIlvenna Bay. With several key catalysts on the horizon, including the pending definitive feasibility study, development and permitting milestones, as well as an exciting near-mine exploration plan, it is a fantastic time to be exploring and developing a mine in one of the best mining jurisdictions," said Bernier. "I am eager to execute on our strategy to build McIlvenna Bay and a centralised processing facility to help transform the Hanson Lake District into the next prolific mining camp in Canada," he said. Foran is in the feasibility study stage of its flagship McIlvenna Bay project in eastern Saskatchewan. The project is located entirely within the traditional territory of the Peter Ballantyne Cree Nation. The company also owns the Bigstone project, a resource development stage deposit located 25 km southwest of its McIlvenna Bay project. Before joining Foran, Bernier was the Pan American Silver Canadian country manager, responsible for managing its multiple operations in the Timmins Region. He held positions as project manager, mine manager and then Bell Creek Complex GM, preceding its acquisition by Pan American Silver in 2019. Prior to this, Bernier was Dumas Contracting GM, where he provided leadership over mine contracting services for companies including Alamos Gold, Glencore, Vale and Goldcorp, which is now Newmont. He has also held management level roles at several operations across North America, including mines owned by FNX Mining, which is now KGHM International, Xstrata Nickel and Falconbridge, both of which are now Glencore, and Placer Dome North, which is now Newmont.