With British Monarch Queen Elizabeth II expected to become the first to celebrate a Platinum Jubilee, on February 6, and the associated demand for commemorative jewellery and giftware merchandise, UK hallmarking body the British Hallmarking Council has sanctioned the design of a commemorative component mark in honour of the occasion. Historically, commemorative marks have been produced to signify a special event, providing an additional point of interest for both the jewellery trade and the consumer; with the latest move providing such a boost for precious metals, including platinum. The Platinum Jubilee mark, designed by jewellery manufacturer Thomas Fattorini, depicts an orb and reflects the traditional fineness mark for platinum. It can be applied to precious metal, alongside a statutory hallmark, by any one of the four UK assay offices. The World Platinum Investment Council (WPIC) explains that Queen Elizabeth II acceded to the throne seventy years ago on February 6, 1952, when she was 25 years old. Throughout this year, Queen Elizabeth II and members of the UK royal family will travel around the UK to undertake a variety of engagements to mark this historic occasion, culminating with the focal point of the Platinum Jubilee Weekend in June. In many cultures, the WPIC says, platinum is the precious metal of choice synonymous with the commemoration of special occasions, especially when symbolising a seventieth anniversary. For example, in 2017, Queen Elizabeth II became the first monarch in British history to celebrate a platinum wedding anniversary. In honour of the occasion, The Royal Mint issued a set of commemorative platinum coins featuring a double portrait of the monarch and her husband. Ahead of the Birmingham 2022 Commonwealth Games in July – The Queen’s Baton Relay, which is already under way – is following in this tradition. The relay celebrates, connects and engages communities from across the Commonwealth during the months leading up to the games themselves. Between October 2021, when the relay started, and the opening ceremony of the Birmingham 2022 Commonwealth Games, the Queen’s Baton will visit all 72 nations and territories of the Commonwealth over 294 days, covering 140 000 km. The Queen’s Baton, which is currently in India, has been specially created by designers and technologists from the UK’s West Midlands in a unique collaboration that fuses science, technology, engineering and art. Significantly, lining the length of its curved shape and woven throughout the baton is a platinum strand, paying homage to Queen Elizabeth II in her platinum jubilee year.