Aim-listed diamond producer BlueRock Diamonds has appointed Meiring Burger as CEO of its subsidiary Kareevlei Mining. He will take over from outgoing Kareevlei Mining CEO Gus Simbanegavi, who is also BlueRock COO. Simbanegavi will step down from his positions, effective March 1, to pursue other business interests. Burger will oversee the recently commissioned one-million-tonne-a-year plant at BlueRock's Kareevlei mine, in the Kimberley region of South Africa. "We are delighted to welcome Meiring to the team as CEO of Kareevlei, whose experience in mine and plant management will enhance the management of Kareevlei. He has the advantage of having a good understanding of Kareevlei and brings strong leadership qualities at a crucial time as the team faces the ongoing and uncertain challenges of Covid-19 alongside the move to ramp up production at the new processing facility during the wet season," says BlueRock chairperson Mike Houston. "I am pleased to report that the mine reopened on January 3, as expected, with almost all of our staff returning to work [following the Christmas holiday]. "I would like to thank Gus for his work and commitment to BlueRock over what has been a very challenging period yet has still seen the company continue to drive its growth strategy. On behalf of his fellow directors and employees, I wish him every success in his future endeavours," Houston says. Burger is an internationally experienced mining industry professional with more than 25 years' technical and managerial experience combined with applicable commercial acumen and a record of delivering value safely and responsibly. He has led major, ultra-class openpit operations up to 150-million tonnes a year with labour forces of in excess of 6 000 people in the Southern African region, and has solid experience in all aspects of exploration, mining operations, mine valuation and environmental management. Burger has held senior positions at various companies including mining contractor African Mining Solutions and First Quantum Minerals where, among other roles, he focused on turning around the openpit Sentinel copper mine, in Zambia.