The World Platinum Investment Council (WPIC) reports that markets for hydrogen fuel cell-powered busses are developing rapidly. Hydrogen fuel cell buses are equipped with fuel cells that use proton exchange membrane (PEM) technology, which relies on a platinum catalyst. The WPIC points out that China is at the forefront of the growing hydrogen fuel cell bus market, with a fleet of 5 290, giving it an almost 94% share of the market. In addition, plans set out by the government of China, including the New Energy Vehicle (NEV) Industry Development Plan (2021-2035) and Energy Saving and NEV Technology Roadmap 2.0, are aimed at stimulating the country’s overall market for zero-emissions electric vehicles, including both battery electric vehicles (BEVs) and fuel cell electric vehicles (FCEVs). By 2035, the market share of NEVs in China is expected to exceed 50%, while growth in FCEVs is expected to be driven by the heavy-duty vehicle segment, including trucks and buses. On a more localised level, more than 20 regions in China have thus far issued phased plans for the promotion of FCEV deployment. Shanghai, for example, has recently proposed a 2023 target of 100 hydrogen refuelling stations, 100-billion yuan of industry output and the deployment of 10 000 FCEVs. The Lishui Economic Development Zone of Nanjing has an objective of deploying a hydrogen fuel cell bus fleet of 300 vehicles. Further, the WPIC notes that the recent Beijing Winter Olympics showcased China’s commitment to FCEVs, with over 850 proton-exchange membrane hydrogen fuel cell buses being used across the games to transport participants around the main competition site of Zhangjiakou, and the alpine competition zone at Yanqing. As well as offering “excellent range and quick refuelling times”, the WPIC highlights that lengthy downtime for recharging is unnecessary, and that unlike a BEV, hydrogen fuel cell buses are also well suited to the cold conditions experienced during the Winter Olympics. This is because the battery performance in a BEV is affected by low temperatures as these can cause the battery to drain more quickly. HYDROGEN BUSSES IN UK AND EUROPE
The WPIC notes that Europe and the UK are also experiencing increasing numbers of hydrogen fuel cell buses on their roads, with well over 150 fuel cell buses in operation across the continent currently. In this regard, the Toyota Motor Corporation has demonstrated its commitment to this market in a collaboration with Portugal-based CaetanoBus to build hydrogen fuel cell buses, using technology it developed for the Toyota Mirai passenger FCEV. The result is the H2.City Gold, which is already in operation in Copenhagen, Denmark; Madrid, Spain; and Bielefeld, Germany. In the UK, the WPIC reports that hydrogen-powered fuel cell buses are carrying passengers on the streets of the West Midlands for the first time since 20 hydrogen fuel cell double decker buses started services at the end of 2021. Meanwhile, the hydrogen fuel cell bus sector in the US received a recent boost with the General Services Administration’s (GSA's) announcement that its new five-year transit bus programme includes hydrogen fuel cell buses for the first time. GSA provides centralised procurement for the federal government, overseeing about $75-billion in yearly contracts.