PERTH (miningweekly.com) – ASX-listed Fortescue Metal’s green energy arm, Fortescue Future Industries (FFI), has signed agreements with publicly-owned Powerlink and Economic Development Queensland to connect sites at Gibson Island and Aldoga near Gladstone to Powerlink’s transmission network to allow renewable electricity to power proposed hydrogen projects. Deputy Premier and Minister for State Development Steven Miles said the parties had agreed to work together to build new transmission connections that will power FFI’s Queensland developments. “FFI is seeking to build a facility at Gibson Island to produce around 50 000 t/y of renewable hydrogen. Connection to the transmission network is vital to allow green energy to power this facility,” Miles said. “Queensland’s constantly growing fleet of renewable power stations will provide the energy to produce green hydrogen ready for export to overseas markets like Japan and South Korea. “By working with Powerlink, FFI will receive a streamlined service across their Queensland connection developments, which could be up and running as soon as 2023.” To support the Gibson Island facility, Powerlink will construct a new 275 kV switchyard at its existing Murarrie substation and two 275 kV feeders to Gibson Island. Works at Aldoga will include establishing a connection to Powerlink’s existing Larcom Creek substation, a 275 kV overhead transmission line, and a new substation at the Aldoga facility. Treasurer and Minister for Trade and Investment Cameron Dick said that as more companies looked to decarbonise, more jobs would be created in the State. “Powerlink, Queensland’s publicly-owned transmission network, will play an integral role in decarbonising our economy,” the Treasurer said. “This agreement will help establish Queensland as one of the world’s leading green energy hubs for hydrogen production, and for jobs in more energy-intensive industries supported by that renewable power.” Energy, Renewables and Hydrogen Minister Mick de Brenni said the Queensland government was investing in building new transmission which will help secure jobs in Queensland. “By establishing renewable energy zones across the state, the Queensland government will enable a new market for thousands of megawatts of new renewable energy,” De Brenni said. “Powerlink’s transmission network will then deliver this clean energy to places like Gibson Island and Gladstone where it will be converted into green hydrogen and green ammonia. “Growing Queensland’s green hydrogen industry means new jobs and global decarbonisation solutions for our trading partners.” FFI founder and chairperson Dr Andrew Forrest said the company is excited to be progressing these green hydrogen production opportunities in Queensland. “We look forward to working with Powerlink to use the grid to deliver green power to our projects, enabling us to move quickly and supporting the entry of more renewables and decarbonisation of the electricity network. “FFI’s goal is to turn Queensland into the global green energy heartland and to help create jobs now and into the future.”