Ferrochrome company Glencore Ferroalloys has handed over a car and manufacturing machinery to woman-owned local business Ramotshwedi, in Rustenburg. Ramotshwedi was founded by Reabetswe Maungwa and is part of Glencore Ferroalloys’ Enterprise Development programme. The programme aims to support small, medium-sized and microenterprises (SMMEs) in the communities near Glencore’s operations so that they can contribute to local economies. The handover was held at the Glencore Business Hub and was attended by Glencore Ferroalloys and Rustenburg representatives. Glencore Ferroalloys enterprise and supplier development superintendent Charlin Ntuli, who addressed guests on the day, said the handover was the beginning of many great things for the community. “Our commitment to transformation goes beyond just ticking the boxes of compliance. When we see talent and potential we truly go all out. As Glencore, we pride ourselves in creating what we call ‘Progress Together’ in our communities and we consistently live out this message wherever we can. “What drew us to Reabetswe and her business was its potential to grow and add value to the local economy. Her type of business speaks to our intention and commitment as a company, that is, to empower women, minimise dependency and develop local black-owned and -controlled businesses,” Ntuli said. She highlighted enterprise development as crucial, as it moves the dependency away from the operation and ensures sustainability outside of Glencore, so that the recipient can contribute to the economy and communities through creating jobs. “There needs to be a further shift in mindset to think of opportunities outside the mine’s core function. We are happy to be here today to give Reabetswe the support that she needs to succeed because her success is also the success of her community,” Ntuli added. The support given to Ramotshwedi forms part of a commitment Glencore Ferroalloys made at the launch of its 16 Days of Activism Against Gender-Based Violence and Femicide awareness campaign, wherein it committed to supporting ten small women-owned businesses near its Rustenburg operations. Glencore also handed over an Opel Combi as well as a fridge, oven, pots and other equipment to Reabetswe so she can continue producing, supplying and transporting her products to consumers.