PERTH (miningweekly.com) – The Australian resources sector has welcomed an announcement by the federal government which will invest A$47-million to slash green tape for industry, protect the environment and improve transparency in project approvals. Minister for the Environment Sussan Ley said the funding would expand a ground-breaking Digital Environmental Assessment Program (DEAP) being piloted in Western Australia to reduce unnecessary duplication and delay. “This is an investment in the future of environmental law reform, one that will help the economy and the environment,” Ley said. “A national DEAP will ensure assessments are based on consistent data, that decisions can be made more quickly, with less cost for all concerned. Proponents will submit applications through an integrated ‘portal’ that meets Commonwealth, state and territory requirements, and which is aligned with a national environmental biodiversity database. “The current system of multiple development applications being made across multiple jurisdictions invites confusion, delay and unnecessary cost.” Ley said that the government’s A$25-million investment in congestion busting had already seen the number of key decisions made ‘on time’ move from just 19% to 96% since 2019, and the DEAP pilot with Western Australia is showing the additional value of a simplified, single touch process. Minister Assisting the Prime Minister and Cabinet Ben Morton said cutting the unnecessary green tape would be a game changer at a critical time for Australia’s growing economy. “It will help drive efficiencies and make it easier to do business. Once fully implemented, the investment will deliver up to A$61-million each year in regulatory savings through streamlined digital user experiences and by reducing the time and effort required for industry to provide information for environmental assessments. “We’ve listened to industry, and we’re delivering a better system that will reduce duplication across Commonwealth and state and territory regulatory systems.” The Minerals Council of Australia (MCA) on Friday said that the DEAP was an important step to more timely and transparent environmental assessments and approvals. “The digital data lodgement platform will integrate Commonwealth, state and territory requirements and will help reduce duplication, and unnecessary complexity that delay minerals projects,” said MCA CEO Tania Constable. “These reforms will support a more efficient assessment process, more consistent decision-making and better environmental outcomes. It will also help build community confidence by increasing transparency around project approval processes. “Practical reforms like DEAP are integral to creating investment certainty, supporting regional jobs, businesses and the communities that benefit from minerals development. The minerals industry has long-advocated for a consistent and coordinated nationally streamlined digital process approach to environmental data, assessment and approval processes,” she added. The Chamber of Minerals and Energy (CME) for Western Australia has also welcomed the investment, with director of policy and advocacy Rob Carruthers saying a single-touch digital approvals process had the potential to meaningfully streamline approval processes and remove unnecessary regulatory duplication. “This digital assessment program is being piloted in Western Austraila and the investment to expand it is welcomed by the Western Australian mining and resources sector,” Carruthers said. “We have long supported a robust regulatory regime for environmental approvals but one that is efficient, transparent and free from duplication. For our sector, and many other industries, removal of regulatory duplication and better coordination of assessments and approvals across government agencies will drive much needed public sector efficiency, and provide business the confidence to invest in major projects. “It’s not until a project obtains final regulatory approval that the really material economic and community outcomes begin to flow through.  With A$91-billion of planned and prospective projects in the pipeline across the Western Australian resources sector, there is a significant prize to be realised if these investments can be brought forward.” The oil and gas sector was also backing the investment, with the Australian Petroleum Production and Exploration Association (Appea) saying it would reduce unnecessary delays and duplication across projects involving multiple jurisdictions. “The oil and gas industry is committed to best environmental practices, supported by our commitment to reduce greenhouse-gas emissions to net zero by 2050,” Appea CEO Andrew McConville said on Friday. “However, our members have consistently said for some time that they consider reducing red and green tape as the critical steps to improving the investment environment, streamlining approval processes and restoring business confidence. “We talk a lot about the massive economic opportunity available to Australia if the policy settings are made more competitive. This is a step in the right direction. “This announcement is an example of how the regulatory burden on business can be sensibly reduced while also improving environmental outcomes.”