PERTH (miningweekly.com) – Oil and gas major Woodside on Tuesday announced the executive team to lead the company following the completion of its proposed merger with BHP’s petroleum business, targeted for the second quarter of 2022. Leadership positions will be based in Perth and Houston, reflecting the global nature of the combined portfolio, said Woodside CEO Meg O’Neill, who noted that the nominated leadership team has the capabilities, experience and diverse perspectives to deliver long-term success for the merged company. “The merged business is expected to have the scale and cash flow to create value for shareholders, deliver growth and thrive through the global energy transition, enabled by a leadership team that brings together the very best of our two organisations,” she said. Woodside CFO Graham Tiver, who joined Woodside at the start of February, after having served with BHP and WMC Resources, has been nominated for a board position, along with Fiona Hicks, who has been nominated to lead Australian operations. Shiva McMahon has been nominated to lead international operations, based in Houston. McMahon is current the GM of the Australia production unit at BHP and has previously held a role of BHP petroleum’s VP of finance. Shaun Gregory has been nominated to lead new energy, based in Perth, and has over 25 years of industry experience. He joined Woodside in 1995 and currently holds the role of EVP sustainability and chief technology officer. Mark Abbotsford has been nominated to lead marketing and trading, based in Perth. Abbotsford joined Woodside in 2002, and has 20 years of commercial, marketing, trading and merger and acquisition experience. He is currently Woodside’s VP marketing, trading and shipping. Andy Drummond has been nominated to lead exploration and development, based in Houston. He is currently VP of sustainability and innovation for BHP petroleum, overseeing environment, social and governance; health, safety and environment and innovation activities. Matthew Ridolfi has been nominated to lead the projects division, based in Houston. He joined BHP in 1991 and is currently the VP of major developments with accountability for global major developments and all operated well and seismic delivery activities. Julie Fallon has been nominated to lead corporate services, based in Perth. She joined Woodside in 1998 and is currently acting SVP corporate and legal. Tony Cudmore has been nominated to lead strategy and climate, based in Perth. Cudmore is currently group sustainability and public policy officer for BHP, having joined the company in 2014. Daniel Kalms is currently SVP merger integration planning at Woodside, and he has been nominated to lead merger integration activities after completion of the proposed merger, based in Perth. Kalms joined Woodside in 2001 and has 20 years of industry experience. “The Woodside board and I would like to thank the current Woodside executive team for their exemplary leadership during this transformational time for our business and extend our congratulations to all those nominated for executive leadership roles in the proposed merged company,” said O’Neill.