Platinum marketing organisation Platinum Guild International (PGI) has launched a new multimedia platform providing an integrated arena for different sectors within the jewellery industry to share novel and important ideas and practices. PlatinumABC, hosted on video streaming service YouTube, enables various industry experts to share their message and knowledge through the creation of videos. The channel is intended to drive awareness and innovation around the future of platinum in the jewellery industry, improve the production process and influence the business ecosystem. With the platform’s content focusing on ideas that are specific to the jewellery industry, the target audience of PlatinumABC will primarily be platinum jewellery industry specialists, such as manufacturers and designers, additionally aiming to reach technology and design innovators. The contribution of new and relevant ideas in the industry aims to influence the way platinum jewellery is designed and made, while making information regarding emerging trends accessible in an unprecedented manner. PlatinumABC offers a series of videos on design and technology trends, as well as interviews with industry leaders, including precious metal three-dimensional printing technology and platinum jewellery trend reports among young consumers. By sharing design trends, reviewing the manufacturing process, participating in offline workshops and a series of other activities, the platform provides inspiration for creativity, and explores new research and development capacities that lead the way for platinum jewellery development. PGI CEO Huw Daniel says that by connecting contemporary elements from technology, manufacturing and design, PGI has the potential to accelerate the growth of the platinum jewellery industry by digitally incubating noteworthy ideas and practices in the field. “PlatinumABC hopes to bring together all the creative minds and people who love and work with platinum, so that the community can continuously share past experiences and innovate into the future,” he adds. PGI innovation and product development director Tai Wong says PGI “feels strongly” that it is the duty and responsibility of the organisation to consolidate and share past knowledge, and build a community of experts to nurture future platinum innovations. “PlatinumABC is looking forward to opening up opportunities for all platinum lovers and creative minds.”