Industry association the World Platinum Investment Council (WPIC) says the UK Royal Mint has marked the occasion of Queen Elizabeth II becoming the first British monarch to reach a Platinum Jubilee, with one of its largest coin collections to date, which includes a choice of both proof and bullion platinum coins to appeal to investors and collectors. "The platinum coins from The Royal Mint are a fitting tribute to Her Majesty, the Queen, as the Platinum Jubilee begins, celebrating a 70-year reign," the organisation says. The Royal Mint has struck every UK coin of the Queen’s reign and has commissioned a series of new designs for its Platinum Jubilee Collection in honour of the occasion. "Both the Platinum Jubilee of Her Majesty The Queen 2022 UK 1 oz Platinum Proof Coin and the Platinum Jubilee of Her Majesty The Queen 2022 UK £5 Platinum Proof Piedfort Coin, carry a unique portrait created especially for the Platinum Jubilee depicting Her Majesty on horseback on their obverse sides," the WPIC says. They also feature a decorative reverse design inspired by the royal mantle, or robe, worn by Her Majesty at her coronation in 1953, the association says. "The Platinum Jubilee collection also comprises the first UK 50p coin to celebrate a royal event, with the Platinum Jubilee of Her Majesty The Queen 2022 UK 50p Platinum Proof Coin limited to a circulation of just 70." Additionally, the Britannia 2022 1 oz platinum bullion coin, struck in 999.5 fine platinum, debuts four new security features, bringing it in line with the gold and silver coins in the Britannia range, which have carried the features since last year. "The Royal Mint now considers Britannias to be the most visually secure coins in the world. "The security features, which enable investors to verify that the product is authentic by rotating it in the light, include a latent image which changes from a padlock to Britannia’s famous trident, surface animation that creates movement to the background of waves, micro-text to provide both decoration and protection, and tincture lines accenting the Union flag on Britannia’s shield," the WPIC says. The Royal Mint was one of the first mints in the world to use advanced picosecond lasers, used in medicine and aerospace, for the production of coins. This technology enables The Royal Mint to work on a submicron level, creating complex designs using indents which are 200 times narrower than the width of a human hair. "Together, these tiny indents can create spectacular special effects, such as the movement of waves seen in the background of the Britannia coin. The advanced technology and intricacy of the design makes it incredibly difficult to replicate," the WPIC says.