Compensation trust the Tshiamiso Trust has warned of fraudulent “touts” claiming to be able to the assist former mineworkers with their silicosis and tuberculosis (TB) claims. The Tshiamiso Trust was established to help thousands of current and previous mineworkers with silicosis and TB claim compensation following the settlement agreement between six mining companies – African Rainbow Minerals, Anglo American South Africa, AngloGold Ashanti, Harmony Gold, Sibanye-Stillwater and Gold Fields – and claimant attorneys in an historic silicosis and TB class action lawsuit. The Tshiamiso Trust has warned that unscrupulous individuals were claiming to be able to assist claimants to expedite their claims for a fee. “Claims and services are free. The [Tshiamiso] Trust does not accept payments for claims and services associated with claims. Claimants should not pay anyone to assist them in any way with their claim as it cannot be processed faster by anyone outside the organisation for any reasons,” the trust said in a statement on February 14. Each case is considered by Tshiamiso on individual merits and then a decision is made, whereafter the claimant is informed directly. The claims process is lengthy and typically takes up to about six months from date of lodgement to finalisation. Potential claimants wanting to lodge a claim can perform a “self-check” on the Tshiamiso Trust website to see if they meet the criteria to successfully lodge a claim. This can be done by entering one’s South African identity number or industry number to check if their details are on the Tshiamiso Trust database and to see if they may be eligible to lodge a claim. “We would like to alert all potential claimants to this fraudulent activity. Claiming from the trust is free and only the trust can process claims to assess if a claimant is due for compensation,” said Tshiamiso Trust communications manager Gugulethu Makhubo. Claimants who need help with the process can call the trust’s call centre (080 1000 240 for those in South Africa or 00 27 10 500 6186 for those outside of South Africa) for assistance or to obtain information about the eligibility of claims. If they potentially have a valid claim, they will be guided to the next steps.