PERTH (miningweekly.com) – The Australian government has announced an additional A$6.7-million in funding to advance women and girls in science, technology, engineering and mathematics (STEM). The investments will ensure the continued success of the Superstars of STEM programme, as well as back the important work of the Women in STEM Ambassador, including the national awareness-raising initiative, Future You. Science and Technology Minister Melissa Price said on the International Day of Women and Girls in Science, that the funding demonstrated the government’s commitment to supporting women and girls and built on the A$147-million of investments to support gender equity in STEM. “The government is determined to break down barriers that stand in the way of girls and women studying STEM subjects and excelling in the careers that follow,” Price said. “The study of STEM subjects and pursuit of STEM careers is essential to our national prosperity and for growing our economy. Our investments will ensure our Women in STEM Ambassador Professor Lisa Harvey-Smith can continue to be a great advocate for gender equity in STEM and the incredible Superstars of STEM programme can inspire even more role models.” Price said the government wanted to see women and girls having equal opportunities in STEM subjects and careers. “Supporting girls and women with opportunities to excel in these areas is not only an important issue of equity, but it bolsters the pool of available STEM-skilled workers. This additional funding will continue to address structural and cultural biases that lead to the under-representation of women and girls in STEM, through amazing programmes like the Superstars of STEM. “The new investment also recognises the work of the Women in STEM ambassador and the Future You campaign in encouraging women and girls to consider STEM subjects and careers.” The government will invest A$2-million in the Superstars of STEM programme, delivered by Science & Technology Australia, allowing it to develop an additional 120 women Superstars into future leaders. An additional A$2.4-million will also be provided to support the Women in STEM Ambassador initiative. Only 20% of girls reported being interested in STEM jobs before 2018, but currently upwards of 68% of girls are now interested in a STEM career. The government will invest an additional A$2.3-million to expand this national digital awareness-raising initiative.