TSX-V- and Aim-listed explorer Thor Explorations has started its 5 000 m Phase 1 reverse circulation (RC) drilling at its 70%-owned Douta gold project in Senegal, designed to extend the strike extensions of the resource which remains open-ended along strike to the north.

The Douta project encompasses the Makosa gold deposit, which currently comprises an inferred resource of 730 000 oz of gold as set out in its maiden mineral resource estimate of November 18, 2021. This year’s work programme, which includes an additional 25 000 m of RC and diamond drilling, is also targeting an upgrade to the existing resource at Makosa and testing three priority targets within the licence. Thor president and CEO Segun Lawson says the Makosa resource provides a solid base for growth. “Our exploration efforts are now focussed on expanding the resource along the prospective corridor that runs along the full 30 km length of our exploration licence.” He adds that Thor’s priority during the first phase of drilling will be given to extensional drilling at Makosa north, where the mineralisation remains open-ended towards the northeast. “We are equally excited with the greenfield discovery Mansa, which is located on the same structure as Makosa,” says Lawson. Meanwhile, Thor reports that operations at its fully-owned Segilola gold mine, in Nigeria, continued to perform on budget and within design capacity, without any unplanned stoppages, during January. As such, total gold production for the month was 7 041 oz at a recovery rate of 93%, with regular gold exports occurring without any issues.

In addition, the Segilola process plant is currently operating continuously above the design mill throughput, with 75 714 t of ore at about 3 g/t processed during January – a 19.2% increase on December. The gravity circuit also outperformed its design specification, with a recovery of over 60%. Thor expects to produce between 20 000 oz and 22 000 oz of gold during the first quarter of this year, with full-year guidance of between 80 000 oz and 100 000 oz of gold.