Precious metals miner Sibanye-Stillwater has tabled a revised wage increase offer to employees working at its South African gold mines, after meeting with the four major trade unions that represent their employees on February 4. This follows after seven months of deadlocked negotiations between Sibanye and unions - Association of Mineworkers and Construction Union, National Union of Mineworkers, Uasa and Solidarity. Trade union Solidarity reports that the mining company resumed negotiations after the Commission for Conciliation, Mediation and Arbitration (CCMA) issued a certificate granting trade unions the right to embark on strike action. “It would appear as if an agreement may now be within reach with Sibanye after a marathon negotiation session last Friday,” notes Solidarity general secretary Gideon du Plessis. He confirms that the trade unions will this week consult with their members about the revised offer. Solidarity says it will encourage its members to consider the new offer favourably. Sibanye’s previous offer for the miners, artisans and officials represented by Solidarity was a 4.1% increase in year one; a 4.7% increase in year two; and a 4.7% increase for year three. The offer has been increased to grant a 5% increase to this category of employees for each of the three years. Sibanye confirms that the 5% offer is higher than 2021’s average inflation rate, and is higher than the average inflation forecasts for 2022 and 2023, as forecasted by the South African Reserve Bank and National Treasury. The company’s previous offer to category 4 to 8 employees was an increase of R520 for year one; a R610 increase for year two; and a R640 increase for year three, but has been amended to offering an increase of R800 in each of years one, two and three. “It was a frustrating seven months of negotiating during which parties negotiated with each other mainly through CCMA facilitation,” Du Plessis points out. The unions will present the offer to its members, and, after finalising agreements, wage negotiations for Sibanye’s platinum mines will start.