PERTH (miningweekly.com) – Renewable energy producer ACCIONA Energía has become the fourth signatory to sign the Central Queensland Statement of Cooperation, joining major Rio Tinto, Alpha HPA and Orica. The Central Queensland Statement of Cooperation would see the signatories to work with the state government to ensure Queensland could benefit from the global shift towards decarbonisation. “The world is starting to realise the natural advantage Queensland has in renewable energy and manufacturing and that we are ready for renewable investment right now,” Deputy Premier and Minister for State Development Steven Miles said. “We are working with industry to unlock more opportunities for Queensland to decarbonise and create jobs, starting in Central Queensland. The Statement of Cooperation outlines our commitment to making Central Queensland a renewable energy powerhouse. “We are bringing together key players in the region to leverage our traditional strengths and build a state that will thrive in the global transformations ahead. This means more opportunities for the region and more jobs for Queenslanders.” Minister for Energy, Renewables and Hydrogen Mick de Brenni said the government is well on its way to achieving its Queensland Renewable Energy Target by 2030. “Late last year we saw ACCIONA Energía sign a historic memorandum of understanding (MoU) with the Stanwell Corporation to power Stanwell’s hydrogen facility with ACCIONA Energía’s renewable energy,” De Brenni said. “There’s a massive growth in demand for renewable energy and this Statement will ensure Central Queensland becomes one of the first regions in the world to benefit from that.” ACCIONA Energía MD Brett Wickham said Central Queensland was a region of great potential for renewable energy. “Central Queensland has enormous opportunities for renewable energy to create new jobs in the region and can supercharge the area’s economic growth,” said Mr Wickham. “Between our MoU with Stanwell Corporation and signing the Statement of Cooperation we have made a strategic long-term commitment to the future of Central Queensland.” The Statement of Cooperation will secure the future competitiveness of Queensland, adding value to a natural energy advantage to drive employment and economic outcomes for the State by focussing on three areas, including committing to industry by establishing certainty for current industry and growing demand, delivering a globally competitive energy solution that is centred around firmed, low-carbon electricity for industry, and growing the industries of the future in Central Queensland by creating an enabling regulatory environment, strengthening regional skills and employment to lower capital intensity, and planning for the infrastructure to enable industry development. Miles said seeing additional signatories joining the statement would translate into more value for Queenslanders. “Our ambitious target to get to net zero emissions by 2050 is creating huge opportunities with more jobs in more industries right along the renewable energy supply chain.”