JOHANNESBURG (miningweekly.com) – In the year of the Queen of England’s platinum jubilee, the coins to be used in the Wimbledon ladies’ and gentlemen’s singles finals coin toss this weekend will be made of platinum for the first time in the championships’ history. As Mining Weekly reported earlier this year, the coins are being presented to the championships by the World Platinum Investment Council (WPIC), the members of which are South Africa's Anglo American Platinum, Impala Platinum, Northam Platinum, Royal Bafokeng Platinum, Sedibelo Platinum and Tharisa. Made of 70 g pure platinum, each coin gram represents a year of royal service by the queen. The obverse, ‘heads’, side of each coin carries the platinum jubilee emblem and has been inspired by the themes of service, endurance and strength. The design incorporates a quotation from the queen's famous speech made on her 21st birthday on 21 April 1947, ‘My whole life whether it be long or short, shall be devoted to your service’, as well as an oak leaf motif inspired by the Royal Badge of the House of Windsor. The reverse, ‘tails’, side of each coin is inscribed with the Wimbledon Roundel, as well as its centenary mark, specially designed for use in centre court’s centenary year. The centre court allusion continues with the use of the inspirational Rudyard Kipling quote, "If you can meet with triumph and disaster and treat those two impostors just the same"; words that are inscribed above the players’ entrance to centre court. All England Club chairperson Ian Hewitt highlighted the symbolic gesture as adding a special element to proceedings at this year’s double celebration and WPIC CEO Paul Wilson expressed delight at the global market authority on platinum investment being given an opportunity to showcase platinum. Wilson noted platinum’s service to the planet by improving air quality and paving the way for hydrogen, “particularly green hydrogen, the next generation, zero-emissions fuel – and its associated uses”. The coins were designed by bespoke jeweller Heirloom London in collaboration with the All England Club, and produced using a combination of modern technology and traditional hand-engraving techniques. Platinum, found overwhelmingly in South Africa, is the metal that is unlocking the global hydrogen economy, with hydrogen poised to become a mainstream, sustainable fuel which will play a central role in decarbonisation; over 30 countries already have road maps or strategy documents setting out their intentions in this regard. Due to its catalytic properties, platinum is fundamental to the technology that enables the hydrogen economy; it is used in the production of green hydrogen from wind or solar power and in fuel cells for zero-emission fuel cell electric vehicles, or FCEVs.