Diversified miner Eurasian Resources Group (ERG) has released its clean cobalt and copper performance report for this year, which has been assured by independent auditors PricewaterhouseCoopers (PwC). The report details ERG’s progress in relation to its clean cobalt and copper framework, which implements the globally recognised supply chain guidance set out by the Organisation for Economic Cooperation and Development (OECD) and, in some cases, takes the efforts a step further. The framework was first introduced in 2019 as the clean cobalt framework and was extended to include copper last year. It aims to deliver high levels of responsible cobalt and copper production, value chain assurance and improved living conditions for local communities. ERG’s framework comprises seven goals: ERG said the report illustrates how these goals are being met at the group’s Metalkol Roan Tailings Reclamation (RTR) operation in the Democratic Republic of Congo and how its operations are being carried out according to international supply chain standards. “It showcases that Metalkol RTR is managing social and environmental impacts and contributing to community development,” the company added. The performance report specifies which initiatives Metalkol participates in and which are done through ERG. “As the world’s second-largest producer of cobalt and a large producer of copper, Metalkol RTR is providing significant support in the transition to a low-carbon economy. This comes with a duty to implement and promote responsible sourcing and long-term, sustainable development,” said ERG CEO Benedikt Sobotka on July 18. The second performance report is the follow-up report on the framework’s implementation and is the first since the inaugural report, which was released in 2019. The two-year gap is a result of unavoidable delays to the assessment that form the basis of the report, including on-site visits by external auditors, owing to the Covid-19 pandemic. ERG said it intends to provide yearly assurances against the framework going forward and has also committed to the Responsible Minerals Assurance Process of the Responsible Minerals Initiative.