Aim-listed Firering Strategic Minerals CEO Yuval Cohen says the systematic and targeted approach to exploration and fieldwork at the company’s flagship Atex lithium/tantalum project, in Côte d’Ivoire, has continued to increase its understanding of the project. “The initial geochemical footprint based on the auger assay results was reconfirmed by the infill auger assay results and two new areas of interest have been identified. “We are now excited to commence our core drilling programme targeting the potentially lithium-bearing pegmatites as part of the fully funded diamond drilling campaign,” he says. The first water borehole required for the Phase 1 core drilling programme targeting the potential lithium-bearing pegmatites has been completed. In terms of its social responsibility, Firering asked drilling contractor FOREMI to also complete a water borehole in the nearby village of Tounvré, which it says was well received. Perth-based Intertek has assayed 430 additional samples from selected extended auger lines, which reconfirmed the initial geochemical footprint announced on April 12. End-of-hole (EoH) data has provided good resolution on bedrock geology. Scoring of results based on percentiles shows prospective areas or pegmatite that are consistent to mapped pegmatites, specifically towards the southwest, Firering points out. Two additional areas of interest were identified from the new infill results. Firering has started work on the first drill hole as part of the Phase 1 core drilling campaign, which comprises 3 000 m of drilling targeting the potentially lithium-bearing pegmatites. The first three drill hole locations have been selected to the west of Spodumene Hill, with further locations further along strike in a north-easterly and south-westerly direction. First core logging results are expected in August, with first assay results to follow in September. The first new trench across the southernmost part of Spodumene Hill was completed and uncovered a contiguous pegmatite with an apparent width of over 100 m. This trench is currently undergoing detailed geological mapping and channel sampling. Trenching activities on the second new trench, located between the first trench and the old, are half completed, while SODEMI trench has started. Once completed, the SODEMI trench will be extended in an easterly and westerly direction, after which an additional trench will be dug across the northernmost part of Spodumene Hill. Each trench will be geologically logged in detail and sampled. A systematic pitting programme has started on and around Spodumene Hill, digging selected pits in areas originally identified during the 1960s with elevated coltan values. Each pit is expected to reach a maximum depth of between 4 m and 5 m, with each metre sampled and assayed. The pits will also be geologically logged. Composite samples of about 100 kg will be sent to Coremet in Johannesburg, South Africa, for metallurgical test work to define the design for a pilot multigravity separation plant. DIRECTORATE CHANGE Ofra Chen has resigned as a nonexecutive director of the company, with immediate effect, to focus on her other professional commitments. The board has thanked Chen for her service to the company and wished her well for the future. Firering has appointed Shai Kol as nonexecutive director. Kol is a founder of the company and has been involved in its development since inception.