Global engineering, procurement and construction provider Worley has acquired technical solutions provider Minera Mining Technology. The two companies have a long-standing relationship having worked together several times in the last 16 years. Headquartered in Western Australia, Minera’s mining, geological and technical consultants work with mine owners to automate and decarbonise operations by determining the best-fit technology solutions and strategies for their assets. The pairing provides enhanced front-end solutions covering automation, fleet decarbonisation or electrification and operational benefits realisation. The deal strengthens Worley’s role in the energy transition and brings greater depth to the roadmaps needed to achieve sustainable mining solutions, all while helping to drive emerging sustainable mining technologies. The acquisition of Minera aligns with Worley’s purpose of delivering a more sustainable world and its aspiration to achieve 75% of its revenue from sustainability-related business within five years. The world needs more mining, but performance and production improvements are required as the energy transition and environment, social and governance pressures call for sustainable materials delivered at pace, says Worley resources global lead Nick Bell. “To meet these demands, the industry needs the right partner to identify and adopt new and emerging technologies, often within an operating environment. The acquisition of Minera means we can do just that for our customers all over the world,” he notes. Automation will remain a puzzle unless miners develop horizons that plan the practical application across their assets, adds Minera director Martin Boulton. “With the introduction of Minera, Worley can create autonomous business plans to help our customers define their target technology landscape, along with the delivery capabilities to achieve this operational state. “We will also continue development of our autonomous skills training to grow industry capability and ensure solutions are implemented safely and on time,” Boulton states.