Mining equipment manufacturer Energy & Densification Systems (EDS) has developed and patented its new technology crushing and milling equipment, the EDS Multishaft Mill. EDS will be exhibiting at this year’s Electra Mining Africa exhibition, in September, and will be promoting its Multishaft Mill at the event. The compact vertical mill uses high-speed impacts to break down particles with large reduction ratios, low energy consumption and improved liberation, the company says, adding that the milling action combines several processes, including crushing, milling, densifying and blending processes, to provide a multitude of output products to satisfy various specifications. The mill has a number of shafts with flinger attachments, which are used to agitate and accelerate the product as it passes through the mill. The product is then broken down owing to impacts on flingers, and the mill body, as well as other particles of the product. EDS notes that the mill has “shown extensive improvements” in reducing total power consumption on a mine, while simultaneously improving efficiency of the beneficiation and recovery of the required elements. “The EDS Mill has shown extensive improvements in both these areas with energy efficiencies up to 75% better than conventional milling equipment and improving liberation beyond the standard beneficiation processes,” the company says. With the ability to be applied in a variety of industry sectors (including mining, waste management, steel manufacture, construction and more), EDS is targeting the mill for specific target markets such as various ores (gold, platinum, chrome, kimberlite), slags, silica, coal, coal waste, biomass, limestone, animal feeds, various mineral and ore waste materials, to name a few. Additionally, various hardware configurations are possible for the mill, including number of shafts and number of flingers per shaft, together with variable speed control of all shafts and discharge gate positions. The mill has also been designed to allow easy attachment of other ancillary equipment. The mill is currently available in 10, 8, 6 and 4 shaft models.