The Mpumalanga province is considering steps to diversify its economy away from its reliance on coal mining and coal-fired power generation and to promote the green economy, particularly in relation to climate-resilient agriculture, Premier Refilwe Mtshweni-Tsipane said on July 13. During a trade and investment roundtable discussion with business owners from the US, she said the province was repositioning itself as a “strategic province to implement a successful transition” from coal-fired power to renewable energy. Much of State-owned power utility Eskom’s coal-fired power station fleet is located in the province. The utility is expected to decommission about 11 000 MW of its coal-fired capacity by 2030. Discussions are under way across all spheres of government and with various stakeholders to determine how best to ensure that the transition away from coal does not leave those who work at the coal mines and power stations, or who rely on those industries for their livelihoods, without jobs and an income. “Looking at the importance of the coal sector’s contributions to the province's economy, measures should be in place to support communities, workers and municipalities in achieving and driving a just transition away from fossil fuels to renewable energy technologies,” the Premier said. She told the visiting US delegates that there were opportunities to repurpose land at decommissioned mines and power stations to pivot to renewable energy production.

“A Renewable Energy Development Zone is targeted for [development in] eMalahleni, where coal jobs are at risk, but where grid capacity is available. This represents a great opportunity to connect new renewable energy generators, while also supporting a just transition for coal workers,” Mtshweni-Tsipane said. She added that the province would collaborate with partners to leverage the existing grid infrastructure to accelerate provincial renewable energy projects, while ensuring such projects contribute to transformation, job creation and local economic development.