PERTH (miningweekly.com) – The Queensland government has launched Australia’s first dedicated workforce development plan for the hydrogen industry. Minister for Training and Skills Development Di Farmer on Wednesday launched the Hydrogen Industry Workforce Development Roadmap 2022-2032 at the Australian Clean Energy Summit in Sydney with the aim of building a pipeline of skilled, hydrogen-ready workers. “This roadmap is the first dedicated workforce development plan for the industry and sets a path to a strong and adaptable workforce for a safe and thriving Queensland hydrogen industry,” Farmer said. “The sunshine state is aiming to fast-track the development of the industry. We’re already accelerating toward our ambitious target of 50% renewable energy by 2030, with a vision to be at the forefront of renewable hydrogen production and the global supplier of choice for green. “Affordable, clean and secure energy has the potential to deliver thousands of jobs and drive the state’s economic growth and we will ensure we maximise workforce opportunities in regional communities across Queensland.” Farmer said the roadmap is based on key insights from early industry players and training providers, combined with deep data analysis to understand the workforce needs as the industry develops. “To deliver this ground-breaking roadmap the government worked closely with industry stakeholders, including multi-national and domestic hydrogen proponents, public and private skills and training providers and professional bodies, regional economic groups and hydrogen clusters, unions and universities,” she said. “The roadmap recognises the importance of having flexible skills and training options to respond when and where new skills needs emerge, tailored responses for local workforces, and attraction and retention strategies. “To attract a new generation of workers the Gateway to Industry Skills Program will add hydrogen as a new industry allowing 30 schools and up to 2 000 students to engage with this key emerging industry. “TAFE Queensland will use Virtual Reality to deliver course content which will allow hydrogen training facilities to be used by more students and workers. “As the leading vocational education training (VET) organisation in the state, TAFE Queensland has recently forged a powerful partnership with Ark Energy to deliver training for the corporation’s hydrogen workforce,” Farmer noted. As part of a $15-million VET emerging industries initiative the government is liaising with industry on future safety and hazards training to strengthen the skills of the hydrogen workforce. Minister for Energy, Renewables and Hydrogen Michael de Brenni said the state’s hydrogen industry was set to tap into growing demand for large scale domestic projects, and export opportunities. “We’re accelerating the development of Queensland-made hydrogen, creating more jobs in more industries, especially in regional Queensland. The state’s wealth of renewable resources, export infrastructure, and skilled workforce, means that Queensland is well-placed to build an internationally leading hydrogen industry. “We have a bold vision for the state’s future and we’re backing Queenslanders to be front and centre of the clean energy transformation.” Farmer has meanwhile said that the growth of the clean energy sector relies on a skilled and capable workforce achieved through government, the training sector and industry working together. “All Queenslanders should have the opportunity to reskill or upskill to advance their career and pursue new opportunities, that’s why the State Budget 2022/23 includes A$1.2-billion for skills and training to help Queenslanders enter the workforce. “We have already set a strong foundation for the emerging hydrogen industry by investing A$50-million in state-of-the-art infrastructure to support training in renewables and hydrogen, providing essential, hands-on experience with new and emerging technologies.”