PERTH (miningweekly.com) – The Australian Petroleum Production & Exploration Association (Appea) has announced the appointment of Samantha McCulloch as CEO. McCulloch will join Appea from the International Energy Agency, having led the IEA Carbon Capture, Utilisation and Storage (CCUS) Unit since 2018. Chairperson Ian Davies said that as an internationally recognised expert in CCUS, McCulloch brought more than twenty years’ experience in energy policy and advocacy within government, the private sector and industry associations in Australia and internationally. “For more than 60 years, Appea has amplified the voice of our industry and collaborated with governments and communities to provide energy for a better Australia. We are very pleased to welcome McCulloch, as an experienced candidate with an informed view of the critical role our industry continues to play in meeting global energy and climate goals,” said Davies. “Now more than ever, energy has a critical role to play. Reliable, cleaner and affordable energy supply is fundamental to all Australians. It is fundamental to keep businesses running. It is fundamental to the economy. It is fundamental to livelihoods and our way of life. And our industry is critical to energy supply both now and into the future. “We look forward to the important work we will progress together, ensuring Appea and our member companies are part of the conversation and the solution.” “The Minerals Council of Australia has welcomed the appointment with CEO Tania Constable noting that McCulloch is the second executive appointment to an Australian resources industry association in the last few days and an endorsement of women in senior leadership roles in the sector. “I look forward to working with Ms McCulloch on mutual resource industry issues, particularly at a time when Australia and the world is focussing on global energy. I also want to congratulate outgoing CEO Andrew McConville for his contribution to the resources industry the last three years and wish him all the best for the future,” said Constable. Earlier this week, the Chamber of Minerals and Energy of Western Australia (CME) appointed Rebecca Tomkinson as CEO. Constable noted that as the first female CEO in CME’s history, her appointment also demonstrated the mining sector’s work in attracting more female participation particularly in leadership positions.