PERTH (miningweekly.com) – Junior Resolution Minerals has appointed Steven Groves as the new MD, starting July 1. Groves has a Bachelor of Applied Geology (Honours) and a Master’s of Economic Geology from the University of Tasmania and is a member of the Australian Institute of Geoscientists and the Society of Economic Geologists. He brings over 27 years’ of geological and corporate experience in the mining industry and has led teams in both Australia and Africa exploring a wide range of commodities from discovery through to development. Most recently he was one of the founding directors of ASX-listed Sultan Resources and led the company as MD since its successful listing in 2018. Groves has also recently held the role of technical director of fellow listed Si6 Metals and also occupied a variety of exploration and management roles with companies such as BHP, Newmont Mining and A-Cap Resources. "I am thrilled to be joining Resolution at a time when the company is poised for significant growth. Resolution has a wonderful portfolio of quality exploration assets across both the battery metals and gold sectors and has generated multiple high-potential drill targets that are due to be tested in the coming months,” said Groves on Tuesday. “The fact that Oz Minerals has committed to spending up to A$9-million over the next five years to earn-in to the Wollogorang and Benmara battery metals projects in the Northern Territory is testament to the quality of these targets. The current capital raise initiative also allows the company to aggressively test the 64 North project in Alaska where the drill rig is currently preparing to mobilise to the Tourmaline Ridge gold prospect. This outstanding target lies a few kilometres along strike from the 12-million-ounce Pogo gold mine and is part of a large tenement holding that completely surrounds Pogo within the world-class Tintina gold province. “I can’t wait to start working with the great team at Resolution and look forward to keeping shareholders updated with positive results as we embark on what is sure to be a transformative exploration phase for the company."