US gold exploration and development company US Gold Corp has reaffirmed its commitment to supporting economic growth in south-east Wyoming through the hiring of local contractors and engaging businesses within the area for its advanced-stage CK Gold gold and copper project. The company has invested about $3-million in community contractors for its proposed project, located at the site of the historic Copper King mine in Wyoming's Silver Crown mining district, hiring local contractors and engaging small businesses within Cheyenne and Laramie County. Additionally, the company is on track to complete its feasibility study, secure the necessary permits and build the mine to be fully operational by 2024. A report compiled by the University of Wyoming's Center for Business and Economic Analysis estimates the CK Gold project will create about 2 600 direct and indirect jobs throughout the lifespan of the project. "The CK Gold project is expected to create long-term jobs, support local workers and bring together the community of Cheyenne and surrounding areas. We take economic development seriously in the communities we work in and are committed to partnering with Wyoming-based contractors to complete this important project, and help boost the region's economic prosperity," said US Gold president and CEO George Bee. "As [the US] celebrates Economic Development Week, we view the CK Gold project as a significant economic driver for Cheyenne and Laramie County. Businesses in our area, workers, and the people living in our community stand to benefit a great deal from the development of this project," said economic development organisation Cheyenne LEADS CEO Betsey Hale. "The vitality of Cheyenne and Laramie County's economy is paramount to our growth and sustainability. We are thrilled that many of our hard-working citizens and local businesses will benefit from this project," said Cheyenne Mayor Patrick Collins. The CK Gold project is located in south-east Wyoming and has a preliminary feasibility study technical report. US Gold owns the Challis gold project, in Idaho.