Canadian lithium producer Snow Lake Lithium has outlined the need to create a comprehensive electric vehicle (EV) ecosystem across North America to protect the future of the region's domestic automotive industry. With more than ten-million vehicles sold in the US last year, the automotive industry is estimated to contribute $1.1-trillion to the US economy every year. The US government has identified battery development and production as strategically important for the US as part of its transition to a clean energy economy and to remain competitive in the global automotive industry. While North American automotive manufacturers have committed manufacturing capacity to meet the increasing demand for EVs, the future of the North American automotive industry relies on sourcing lithium hydroxide on the continent rather than importing it from China and Asia, as well as creating an integrated domestic supply chain. “The US is the birthplace of the automobile and the second largest car producer in the world. With increasing demand for EVs, we are facing a once-in-a-century industrial pivot and need to act fast to avoid losing our competitiveness in the global market. “To succeed in the future net-zero economy, we need to create a vertically integrated domestic supply chain to achieve battery production at scale and future supply security," Snow Lake CEO Philip Gross comments. Snow Lake calls on government, original-equipment manufacturers, battery manufacturers, supply chain and academia to come together to create an integrated and comprehensive electrified ecosystem including lithium mining and processing plants, as well as manufacturing capabilities and charging infrastructure. “At Snow Lake, we strongly believe that now is the time to build a rock to road supply chain for EVs for the longevity of the industry.” Snow Lake is developing the world’s first all-electric lithium mine in Manitoba to enable domestic supply of this critical resource to the North America EV industry. The company's 55 000 acre site is expected to produce 160 000 t/y of 6% lithium spodumene a year over a ten-year period. Currently, Snow Lake Lithium has explored around 1% of its site and is confident that further exploration will increase estimates over the course of the next year. Snow Lake’s mine will be operated by almost 100% renewable, hydroelectric power to ensure the most sustainable manufacturing approach. Over the coming months, Snow Lake Lithium will continue its engineering evaluation and drilling programme across its Thompson Brothers Lithium project site, with the expectation that mining operations will transition to commercial production in late 2024.