Ghanaian Vice President Dr Mahamudu Bawumia will be speaking at the upcoming West African Mining and Power Exhibition (Wampex) at the Accra International Convention Centre, Ghana, which will take place from June 1 to 3. “Looking towards the future of mining in West Africa and across the continent, it is imperative that our mineral resources . . . continue to be managed for our collective interest. “Our primary aim and responsibility is therefore to ensure that the West African mining industry continues to be managed on a sustainable economic, social and environmental basis, to ensure its contribution towards the economic empowerment of our people, generating opportunities for local entrepreneurship and creating sustainable employment opportunities,” Bawumia said. Wampex, together with the associated West African Mining and Power Conference (Wampoc), will bring together strategic private and public industry stakeholders to discuss and debate the drive for sustainable investment opportunities in West Africa. In addition to increased government involvement, Wampex/Wampoc will feature the support of the Economic Community of West African States (Ecowas), who will also be hosting the Ecowas Federation of Chamber of Mines General Assembly during the event. “Over a series of interactive and innovative technical workshops and panel discussions led by senior industry experts, Wampex/Wampoc attendees will explore the latest insights into sustainability, as well as strategies to develop diversified economies, stimulate investment and benchmark operational excellence by shaping the future of West Africa’s mining industry,” said organiser DMG Events portfolio director Le-Ann Hare. In addition to the technical workshops and extended networking opportunities, Wampex/Wampoc will host a range of mining and power suppliers and technologies who operate in the region, with more than 80 exhibitors from 16 countries, as well as a new commercial and energy-intensive users’ zone. The West African mining industry is one of the world’s largest gold-producing regions and supplies 22.6% of global titanium oxide, 11.5% of global bauxite and 5.6% of global uranium. Each year, West African countries export minerals worth about $16.1-billion. Modern democratic Ghana ranks as the sixth-largest producer of gold and magnesium globally, with the country’s mining industry accounting for more than half of its foreign direct investment. Because mining is Ghana’s primary tax-paying sector, the government says it has a critical role to play in leading the nation’s sustainable economic development. One example of its potential to stimulate sustainable economic growth is gold miner AngloGold Ashanti’s $500-million investment in reopening the Obuasi gold mine, which promises a revival of the Obuasi town, new local and national employment opportunities and an expansion of the country’s mining value chain.