PERTH (miningweekly.com) – The Western Australian government is investing A$14.6-million to establish an Aboriginal Empowerment Unit to ensure developments in Western Australia's resources industry deliver improved outcomes for Aboriginal people. The Aboriginal Empowerment Unit will develop and implement the Department of Mines, Industry Regulation and Safety’s Aboriginal Empowerment Initiative (AEI) program. This program will ensure mining and resources projects and policies are developed in a culturally respectful way, and will improve information access for Aboriginal people related to activities on their lands. The program will also create new Aboriginal liaison officer roles to meet with Traditional Owners to share information and promote best practice engagement between industry and Aboriginal people. The AEI will promote and help maintain strong relationships and partnerships between Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander peoples, the broader community and the state government, to create and expand economic opportunities in the resources industry. “It is important that Western Australian mining and petroleum activities also deliver improved outcomes for Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander peoples,” said Mines and Petroleum Minister Bill Johnston. “While there has been much progress, there is still more work that needs to be done to strengthen the capacity of their involvement in resources development. This includes being part of the decision-making on future economic development opportunities for Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander people and their communities. “The Aboriginal Empowerment Initiative contributes to the government's commitment to improving outcomes for Aboriginal people.” Part of the funding will be used to create up to 29 jobs at the Unit from 2022/23 to 2025/26. Aboriginal Affairs Minister Tony Buti said the government is committed to improving outcomes and livelihoods for Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander peoples across Western Australia. “The Aboriginal Empowerment Initiative supports the government's Aboriginal Empowerment Strategy 2021-2029 launched in September 2021, which sets out the strategic approach for working with Aboriginal people and creating better outcomes. “This initiative also contributes to the work being done to expand Aboriginal people's economic opportunities, which is a priority reform in Western Australia's Closing the Gap Implementation Plan.”