PERTH (miningweekly.com) – The Queensland government on Wednesday launched a draft safety code of practice for the emerging green hydrogen industry. The draft code proposes alternate means of achieving a safe outcome where existing obligations in the current legislation are problematic for hydrogen fuel applications. It will be routinely reviewed and revised as new standards, competencies and applications are developed. Minister for Resources Scott Stewart said Queensland would be the first state to develop a clear pathway for hydrogen safety system compliance. “Green hydrogen is an emerging industry which will create new jobs throughout regional Queensland which is why it’s important the right safety guidelines are in place. Current legislation and safety requirements are tailored for traditional products like liquefied petroleum gas (LPG) and natural gas and do not specifically target hydrogen fuel applications,” he said. “The draft code will deliver a framework to outline minimum safety requirements and give businesses certainty that they are compliant. It will be useful for applications that use hydrogen as a fuel gas and will provide guidance to the industry about safe operations, regulatory compliance and approval processes.” Minister for Energy, Renewables and Hydrogen, Mick de Brenni said Queensland’s reputation for safety and reliability was an important guarantee for both workers and investors. “As we grow the future fuels value chain, workers and unions have told us they want their workplaces and processes to meet the highest safety requirements, so the government will lead as the first jurisdiction to establish a hydrogen code of practice,” De Brenni said. “We know our global partners want to do business with Queensland because they trust we will deliver a guaranteed clean energy supply chain, as well as high ethical, operational and workplace safety standards. “Green hydrogen is key to diversifying our energy sector and growing more jobs in more industries, so ensuring the safety of workers and the public is paramount. “The government has backed green hydrogen with our A$2-billion Hydrogen and Renewable Energy Jobs Fund with projects across Queensland, as well as securing the world’s largest electrolyser manufacturing plant in Gladstone, fuel cell manufacturing in Springfield and the tri-state Hydrogen Superhighway agreement with New South Wales and Victoria.” Stewart said Resources Safety and Health Queensland had consulted with industry and business to develop the draft code which is now open for consultation. “As the first cab off the rank in Australia it’s important to get feedback from a range of stakeholders during the consultation period. I encourage peak bodies, other state regulators, hydrogen companies and businesses that are planning a hydrogen project to step forward and provide input. “Together we will be leading the way in development of a code to guide safe development of the industry as it takes off in Queensland.” Once the feedback is considered, the policy approach and relevant legislative amendments will be finalised later in 2022.