K+S Potash Canada (KSPC) on Wednesday unveiled its long-term growth plan for the Bethune mine, in Saskatchewan, announcing that it would effectively double production capacity over the next couple of decades towards four-million tonnes a year. “Saskatchewan has the food, fuel and fertilizer the world needs, and we are thankful for partners like K+S who will continue to play an important role in sustainable food security conversations world-wide,” said Premier Scott Moe. "Today’s announcement represents another vote of confidence in Saskatchewan as a global leader in sustainable, responsible potash production,” commented Energy and Resources Minister Bronwyn Eyre. “We look forward to continuing to work with K+S as we grow our potash sector and our economy." KSPC is currently undertaking a feasibility stage, mapping out the future milestones of growth and timelines for supporting projects. The company will work closely with provincial and federal governments during this phase to ensure it remains in a successful position to sustain future growth. “Optimising our business at Bethune mine enhances the strong position of K+S as an internationally-oriented producer of minerals critical to agriculture and other industries,” said K+S Aktiengesellschaft COO Holger Riemensperger. “Bethune mine is looking at safely and sustainably growing profitability while simultaneously reducing environmental impact, and building a more diverse and inclusive workforce while continuing to engage with local and Indigenous communities throughout all stages of the plan.” To support these plans, the company is currently seeking employees in various engineering, information technology, operations, trade, and supporting roles, with a longer-term outlook to hire more than 100 additional employees, primarily in operations, as new systems are established. “The main focus right now is to establish the team that will drive the growth plan and associated projects,” said KSPC president Sam Farris. “Planning for growth is an opportunity to develop infrastructure and programs that will continue our progress toward becoming world-class, and I’m confident we’ll continue to attract the talent we need across the business to realise these opportunities.” KSPC currently employs more than 400 people at the Bethune mine and Saskatoon and Port Moody offices.