High-voltage electrical data analytics business Voltvision has completed Phase 1 of a pioneering energy efficiency and operational enhancement project at Endeavour Mining’s Houndé mine, in Burkina Faso. The results of this initial phase have been so constructive that Voltvision has been commissioned to roll out the project to all of Endeavour’s mines and development projects across West Africa, the company says. This project hinges on Voltvision’s big data software solution, a programme that has been designed by mining specialists and engineers to optimise energy consumption and improve predictive maintenance on all high-voltage equipment used on mine sites. The software is coupled with a data extraction cube – a secure ‘plug-and-play’ analytics device installed on a mine’s network. This device extracts and transmits hundreds of energy-related data points to the cloud-based software using Wi-Fi or fourth-generation telecommunications networks. “The Phase 1 roll-out of this project was intended to provide high resolution data extraction in support of existing data systems presented in mobile and personal computer-based dashboards. This allowed the mine’s technical team to monitor incoming grid power quality and the power quality across the Houndé power system. “It has also allowed the accurate recording and logging of power use, as well as the movement from source to point of use again across the whole high-voltage and medium-voltage network,” says Voltvison MD and cofounder Manoli Yannaghas. Phase 1 of the project started in December 2021 when the Cube device was remotely installed across Hounde’s high-voltage electrical network, with assistance from the Endeavour team. The ‘plug-and-play’ nature of the device allowed the project to begin with minimal hassle and zero downtime in production, informs Yannaghas. “In the four months since this installation, a range of data points, numbering more than 200 individual points, have been collected and analysed. Early analysis of this data has facilitated a clear and comprehensive understanding of how the mine’s electrical network is behaving and how power is used in real-time. “This has made it possible for the Endeavour team to identify hidden problems and inefficiencies and understand what changes are required to achieve greater energy efficiency across the entire operation. The correction of such efficiencies can deliver quick cost savings and carbon dioxide reduction, as well as edging closer to operational excellence,” Yannaghas says. He adds that the encouraging data recorded in this initial phase is a solid foundation for Phase 2, which is due to begin this month. Phase 2 is intended to identify further power savings opportunities; develop early warning mechanisms for grid outages; and extract demonstrable Scope 1 and 2 greenhouse-gas emission numbers. “Voltvision will also provide highly accurate asset management services on capital equipment using algorithms it has developed with leading machine learning universities to provide advanced warnings of performance changes and fault development,” Yannaghas notes. Voltvision’s electrical management software is in the process of being rolled out across the rest of Endeavour’s operations. “Through this initial Phase 1, we have formed an excellent working relationship with Endeavour Mining and are exceptionally pleased with the results produced thus far." “We look forward to further engagement and assisting the company in optimising its high-voltage electrical asset base, realising cost savings and facilitating the decarbonisation of its mine and project portfolio,” notes Yannaghas.