PERTH (miningweekly.com) – Diversified miner BHP’s iron-ore division is aiming to more than double its spend with Indigenous vendors to more than A$300-million by the end of the 2024 financial year. BHP asset president Western Australian iron-ore Brandon Craig said BHP wanted to do much more to build sustainable, profitable and enduring partnerships with Indigenous businesses across its operations, and were working hard at all levels of BHP to make this happen. He made the announcement at an event with the Nyiyaparli people in Newman to celebrate the signing of a A$9.2-million contract with Karlka FenceWright, a wholly owned subsidiary of the Karlka Nyiyaparli Aboriginal Corporation (KNAC). The contract will see 5 km of fencing panels fabricated locally and installed across BHP’s six residential villages around Newman. Many of the panels will feature the work of Victor Parker, Traditional Owner, senior Nyiyaparli elder and artist. Karlka FenceWright is one of 70 Indigenous vendors currently registered with BHP. This financial year, BHP Western Australian iron-ore is targeting a total direct Indigenous procurement spend of A$137-million. This annual spend is expected to more than double by 2023-24 to more than A$300-million a year. “Our partnership with Karlka FenceWright and the Nyiyaparli people, which we are celebrating today, is just one of many wonderful partnerships that we hope to build upon into the future,” Craig said. “Contracts like this support the growth of Indigenous enterprise and innovation, and create new opportunities for those businesses to support their own communities – something Indigenous business does best.” Up to 80 people will be employed by Karlka FenceWright on this project, with a target to employ Indigenous people in at least 15 per cent of those roles. Work began in April and is due to end in July. Western Australian Minister for Mines and Petroleum Bill Johnston congratulated BHP on doubling its funding to support Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander businesses in Western Australia. 

“I’d encourage other mining companies to look at opportunities to connect with local Aboriginal businesses.
    
“The government is committed to ensuring developments in Western Australia’s resources industry delivers improved outcomes for Aboriginal people. 

“This is why, I was pleased to recently announce the Department of Mines, Industry Regulation and Safety will establish an Aboriginal Empowerment Unit to ensure resources projects and policies are developed in a culturally respectful way.”