Minerals blockchain platform Minexx has appointed Dominique Kayigire responsible sourcing manager – a newly created position – to further accelerate the company’s ability to secure mineral supply chains, from being mined to the point at which they are used in electronic products. He joins Minexx with more than ten years’ combined experience in mineral traceability, compliance and responsible sourcing as RCS Global Group better mining Rwanda country manager, and implementing and governing mineral due diligence and traceability programmes. At Minexx, Kayigire will be responsible for leading the company’s blockchain-backed compliance and traceability product and implementing the governance procedures around Minexx’s code of conduct. This will enable Minexx to maintain its reputation for creating transparent end-to-end supply chains, while ensuring it meets market standards and expectations in different regions. Minexx CEO and co-founder Marcus Scaramanga says Kayigire’s breadth of experience and first-hand knowledge of operating in sub-Saharan Africa is very important for the company. “It also signals our continued expansion of our capabilities to meet demand in line with our carefully thought-out strategy.” Scaramanga says Minexx believes something can be done to foster fair trade and transparent value chains that benefit miners and their communities, but also governments, the environment, traders, technology companies and consumers. Kayigire joins Minexx at a time of rapid growth, as demand for minerals – such as cobalt, copper, tin and tungsten – continues to rapidly increase as renewable energy demand soars, in combination with an increasing appetite for new technology. The Minexx blockchain platform, which has global applicability, enables trade and compliance, bringing benefits to miners, smelters, traders, technology companies and governments, while directly impacting ten of the 17 United Nations Sustainable Development Goals. Kayigire says he looks forward to working with local rural communities, helping to transform an industry; to create sustainable communities, that are so important to sub-Saharan Africans and their livelihoods. “The ability to trace where our minerals are from will have a huge positive impact for communities and their sustainable prosperity and for industry and consumers.”